---
title: "English’s Atomic Mutants"
author: Michael D. Gordin
layout: essay
slug: "englishs-atomic-mutants"
previous: "universal-creole"
---


Every nuclear novel is concerned with describing the aftermath of
catastrophe: the massive deaths, the infrastructural collapse, the
political transformations. Each selectively chronicles only certain
scenarios out of a wide range of possibilities, but an exploration of
the discontinuity — using nuclear war as the *deus ex machina* to
license the imagination to roam — is intrinsic to the genre.

There is, however, one discontinuity left largely unexplored: the great
silence about language itself. In David Brin's 1985 classic of the
genre, [*The Postman*](http://www.davidbrin.com/postman.html) (which
begot the less-classic [Kevin Costner
film](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119925/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1) twelve years
later), a drifter walks from Minnesota to Oregon decades after the
entire social structure of the United States has collapsed due to a
nuclear conflict and the post-nuclear survivalist militias who tore down
what remained. He comes across a sack of mail by a long-dead postman’s
corpse and uses it to talk his way out of trouble and, eventually, to a
resurgence of some kind of civic structure. The key word in that
description, for our purposes, is “talk.” Decades have passed,
long-distance communication is gone, and communities have become highly
local. And yet Gordon Krantz (our drifter) is able to understand
everything that people say to him across thousands of miles. No
confusions due to slang or word choice, no accent problems, no
admixtures of other languages. Post-apocalyptic English is identical to
the English before the catastrophe.

Everything else collapses, but the language — American Standard English
(which isn’t even [that universal in the United
States](http://www.dialectsarchive.com/united-states-of-america) of
today) — remains unproblematically constant. Brin is far from the only
author who writes this way; the overwhelming majority of nuclear novels
present fascinatingly imaginative scenarios of destruction and
transformation but just don’t talk about English itself, the medium in
which they are written.

So let’s talk about it, taking as our launching point some of the
exceptional books that explicitly address the collapse of language, in
some cases making it a central metaphor for the post-apocalyptic state.
Most share a common structure. You are plunged, in the first sentence,
into a completely alien world — it might be a distant planet, for all
the resemblances it has to the world you see around you. Soon, however,
you come to realize that this is *our* planet (often, but not always,
you are in what once was the United States), and the nuclear war that
obliterated twentieth-century civilization lies far enough in the past
that it has reached the status of mythology or folklore. (In the
terminology I introduced in [the first of these
essays](http://histscifi.com/essays/gordin/languages.html), the
“language-y” nuclear books tend to be Epic.) The plot is driven by
interactions and conflicts (typically violent) between tribes or clans
that speak different, but related, languages. (You can call them
dialects, if you will. [Linguists consider this distinction, however
articulated, very
problematic](http://www.indiana.edu/~hlw/Introduction/dialects.html),
but the issue doesn’t concern us here.) A few individuals serve as
translators, and in an aside the reader learns that these languages have
a common ancestor, and that with a good ear a person could learn the
vowel mutations and consonant substitutions that transform one language
into another.

This is the linguistic undercurrent in such classics as Walter M. Miller
Jr.’s [*A Canticle for
Leibowitz*](http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/science-fiction-classic-still-smolders)
(1960), Paul O. Williams’s [Pelbar
Cycle](https://www.blackgate.com/2014/01/31/paul-o-williams-and-the-pelbar-cycle/)
(a series of seven novels that began in 1981 with *The Breaking of
Northwall*), and Poul Anderson’s [Maurai
novels](http://www.zarthani.net/Poul_Anderson/maurai.htm). The reader
sometimes learns about how these languages emerged. In *Canticle*, we
only hear details of the problem in the final part when the abbot Dom
Jethra Zerchi’s translating computer goes on the fritz when trying to
oscillate between Alleghenian and Southwest, and the reader is told that
the characters often communicate in “antediluvian English,” which we are
made to understand is mid-twentieth-century American English.
(Sometimes, since many characters are Catholic monks, they also use
Latin, or “Anglo-Latin,” whatever that is.) In the companion novel to
*Canticle —* [*Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse
Woman*](https://www.sfsite.com/10b/leib19.htm), published posthumously
in 1997 — which takes place roughly in the second of the three
widely-spaced temporal episodes of the original novel — a character
explains that the languages consist of a mixture of English and Spanish
with various pronunciation shifts. Miller’s exposition is a rare glimpse
at the sociolinguistic scaffolding that undergirds the imagined future.

Poul Anderson offers something similar in his 1983 Maurai novel, *Orion
Shall Rise*. The book follows tumultuous path of Talence Iern Ferlay as
he navigates the geopolitics of a postapoaclyptic world. The plot is
[enormously
complicated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orion_Shall_Rise), but the
gist concerns the renegade Northwest Union (roughly the Pacific
Northwest of the today’s United States and Canada) attempting to
reactivate the extremely controversial [Project
Orion](https://www.ted.com/talks/george_dyson_on_project_orion), an
American Cold War fantasia of using nuclear explosions to propel a
spacecraft. The Maurai Federation (hailing from New Zealand and
Australia) keep the world stable under a strictly anti-nuclear regime,
and the Northwest Union chafes under their collaboration with the Domain
(today’s Western Europe), which is kept in order through a
Buckminister-Fulleresque solar-powered Skyholm tower.… This is a world
of solar and wind power, where distances are vast and languages and
peoples have become intermixed and fragmented. Almost every language
from before the nuclear war has intermixed and evolved, with the
surprising exception of Brezhoneg (Breton), Iern’s native tongue —
rather remarkable given that [Brezhoneg is struggling
today](http://www.omniglot.com/writing/breton.htm).

Brezhoneg may have survived in *Orion Shall Rise*, but English didn’t.
Here’s a capsule description of what happened, interjected in a
conversation between Iern (from the [European] Domain) and his lover
Ronica (from the [North American] Northwest Union):


> “She spoke Unglish, but Iern understood. At odd moments along the way,
she had led him in practicing it, and Vanna had shown him books in it.
The written language was sufficiently near Angley that he knew he could
quickly learn to read, if not to write very reliably. Speech would take
a while longer. As yet, he could only follow Ronica, because he was used
to her voice, and only in fragments. However, it had become clear to him
— as Mikli had remarked on an evening at the campfire — that the two
speeches transformed into each other according to fairly regular rules.
Once he had mastered those, fluency would become just a matter of
exercise and of acquiring vocabulary.

>The dialects of Ingliss present in various parts of Oceania were
something else again. As for Maurai, while its grammatical structure was
basically Hinja-Uropan, scarcely half its words were related to Angley
or Francey, and their line of descent had seen countless mutations.”
(Poul Anderson, *Orion Shall Rise* [New York: Pocket Books, 1983]
271-272.)


Out of one language, emerged three. There’s an ironic twist here,
because contemporary English is the product of a melding of languages
(Old English, French, Latin, some Scandinavian dialects, and more) — the
result of invasions and in-migrations. (To get a sense of this, click
here[^1] to see the Latin/Romance-derived terms in the above passage;
just about everything else is Germanic.)

It is not very difficult to figure out where Anderson and Miller got the
idea from, for this is the basic picture of what happened to Latin in
the centuries following Late Antiquity’s version of a nuclear
apocalypse: the collapse of the Western Roman Empire. (The East
functioned for centuries to come as the empire we now know as
[Byzantium](http://www.ancient.eu/Byzantine_Empire/) — they continued to
call it “Rome” — based in Constantinople, but they spoke Greek so we
don’t need to worry about them for this story.)

You do not have to be intimately familiar with [Roman
history](https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/the-history-of-rome/id261654474)
to understand and enjoy the nuclear novels, but if you happen to be
conversant in your Diocletian and Ostrogoths, it certainly helps, for
the parallels are deliberately built on several levels: empires that
span what was for them the known world, built on military superiority
and (the vestige of) republican institutions, technological innovation,
implacable foes in the East (Persia mainly, but the Germanic tribes are
sometimes invoked), and so on. And, in the end, Rome fell, spawning —
with apologies to Medieval historians, but so the popular imagination
would insist — darkness and chaos across Europe for about a millennium,
until the Renaissance revived Roman traditions. In the nuclear novels,
aspects of the decline and fall of Rome are rehearsed over and over
again — implicitly and sometimes explicitly.

The linguistic version of this story is straightforward. When the Roman
Empire collapsed, the populations speaking [regional
varieties](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/classical-studies/classical-languages/regional-diversification-latin-200-bc-ad-600)
of Latin across Western Europe and the Mediterranean began to diverge
into separate languages, which we know today as the “*Roman*ce
languages”: French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, [and
others](http://www.orbilat.com/General_Survey/List_of_Romance_Languages.html).
What Anderson (Angley, Ingliss, Unglish) and Miller (Alleghenian,
Southwest) described for English was simply a direct parallel to the
Latin. The books themselves were written in “antediluvian English,” but
they didn’t need to be.

Consider what might be the most impressive of the linguistic nuclear
novels: Russell Hoban’s [*Riddley
Walker*](http://www.ocelotfactory.com/hoban/riddley.html) (1980). Hoban,
the American-born but English-resident author of children’s books both
[technical](https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/russell-hoban/what-does-it-do-and-how-does-it-work/)
and
[culinary](http://www.russellhoban.org/title/bread-and-jam-for-frances),
portrayed the title character’s first-person account of the rediscovery
of technology about a millennium or so after a nuclear war devastated
England and collapsed civilization. Riddley’s report of the mythology of
the nuclear war is perhaps more intelligible if read out loud (best with
[a Kentish accent](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj4MFlhDujc)):



>“Wen Mr Clevver wuz Big Man uv Inland they had evere thing clevver. They
had boats in the ayr & picters on the win & evere thing lyk that. Eusa
wuz a noing man vere qwik he cud tern his han tu enne thing. He wuz
werkin for Mr Clevver wen thayr cum enemes aul roun & maykin Warr. Eusa
sed tu Mr Clevver, Now wewl nead masheans uv Warr. Wewl need boats that
go on the water & boats that go in the ayr as wel & wewl nead Berstin
Fyr.” (Russell Hoban, *Riddley Walker*, expanded edition [Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1998, 1980], 30.)



I could “translate” it into contemporary English, but that would ruin
the fun. Hoban stated that he made this move in order to slow the
reader’s thinking down to Riddley’s level, and along the way his
coinages of new terms — “plomercy” for “diplomacy,” for example — imply
folk etymologies that work poetically as a double entendre. The language
itself, in its implied “decay” from our current speech, was meant to
show the involution that would come as our societies degenerate into the
roving violence and ignorance of Riddley’s universe.

These are powerful books, and linguistically they make sense. What keeps
certain languages today mutually intelligible and relatively stable over
large stretches of space and time — you can speak (a variety of
standard) English all over the world and be understood, and you can read
Benjamin Franklin without strain — is the persistence of educational and
communication systems to maintain the standard language as standard.
When those break down, the natural linguistic experimentation and
improvisation that linguists have been documenting for centuries begins
to pull apart this precariously stable system. Compared to the vision of
a single emergent nuclear language that I discussed in [a previous
installment](http://histscifi.com/essays/gordin/universal-creole), this
is much more plausible.

The linguistic-dispersion framework lacks for realism in only one
aspect, and that itself bears an important historical and linguistic
lesson. In all of these post-apocalyptic nuclear novels — with the
partial exception of Miller’s — the divergences of English come from the
evolution (or degeneration) of the language under its own internal
power. It is not admixed with French or Spanish or Urdu or Cherokee. It
is just <span style="font-size:150%">E</span>nglish, full stop, under its own steam. Although the
purported fall of the Roman Empire serves as the historical model, this
mono-linguistic transformation was not what happened to Latin; Celtic
and other regional languages mixed into it, giving us (via French)
Gallic words like *change* or *piece*. Such recombinations would
certainly happen to English as well. The reason the novels pretend it
won’t is the same reason that Brin did not address language at all in
*The Postman*: a belief that the United States is a basically
monolingual place, which [it really
isn’t](https://www.ic.nanzan-u.ac.jp/AMERICA/kanko/documents/vol.31_pdf/nras31_08_sollors_werner.pdf),
and never has been. Most of the world is
[multilingual](http://www.linguisticsociety.org/resource/multilingualism),
and the United States is no different. Even fictional post-nuclear
America.

The nuclear novel is essentially an obsolete genre today, as other ways
of shattering the planet have displaced the once-omnipresent threat of
atomic holocaust. But they are important to revisit because for several
decades they provided a petri dish in which possible futures
proliferated in the public imagination. Along with imagining the future,
they also expose some of the assumptions of the present — the present in
which they were written, and our present, too. The linguistic aspects of
the novels show us one way in which those novels represented the
authors’ imagination of their present, and also how they got it wrong —
with lessons for how we should think about our own present, our own
language. We are already speaking the English of *their* future, and
that English will be shaped by its multilingual environment. As are we.

[^1]: “She spoke Unglish, but Iern understood. At odd **moments** along
    the way, she had led him in **practicing** it, and Vanna had shown
    him books in it. The written **language** was **sufficiently** near
    Angley that he knew he could quickly learn to read, if not to write
    very **reliably**. Speech would take a while longer. As yet, he
    could only follow Ronica, **because** he was **used** to her
    **voice**, and only in **fragments**. However, it had become
    **clear** to him — as Mikli had **remarked** on an evening at the
    **camp**fire — that the two speeches **transformed** into each other
    **according** to **fairly regular rules**. Once he had mastered
    those, **fluency** would become just a **matter** of **exercise**
    and of **acquiring vocabulary**.

    The **dialects** of Ingliss **present** in **various parts** of
    **Oceania** were something else again. As for Maurai, while its
    **grammatical structure** was **basically** Hinja-Uropan,
    **scarcely** half its words were **related** to Angley or Francey,
    and their **line** of **descent** had seen countless **mutations**.”
