---
title: "The Universal Creole"
author: Michael D. Gordin
layout: essay
previous: "languages"
slug: "universal-creole"
---



Linguistically speaking, the world is rather inconvenient. Depending on
how you count — the boundary between a “language” and a “dialect” is one
of the great blurry zones in humanity’s conceptual map — there are
[between 5,000 and 7,000 languages](https://www.ethnologue.com/world) on
the Earth’s surface. As far as we seem to be able to tell, that
astonishing range is typical of humanity’s linguistic diversity.
Languages die out all the time, and new languages are simultaneously
born. Our linguistic vista is an astonishing, evolving patchwork quilt,
not a monochromatic coat of paint.

But does it have to be this way? Surely it would be easier if everyone
used only one language, whether that means everyone sharing the same
second language, or just eliminating this pesky diversity altogether and
only using a single tongue for the entire planet. The dream of a global
language has often been high on the to-do list for futuristic
speculators.

Science fiction is littered with visions of a common humanity bound by a
common auxiliary or vehicular language. In the universe of Star Trek,
for example, everyone seems to speak “[Federation
Standard](http://memory-beta.wikia.com/wiki/Federation_Standard).” Given
that the starship *Enterprise* began its voyages in the 23rd century,
you might think this language would have transformed quite a bit from
late-20th-century English, but Kirk and Spock rescued some whales from
the 1980s in *Star Trek IV* with little linguistic difficulty. (They do
encounter some shocking reminders of ’80s hair.) In that universe,
language barriers emerge only with peoples who also have their own
language, such as the fearsome warrior race of Klingons, who speak
tlhIngan Hol. Klingon is more diverse than Standard and [has
dialects](http://www.omniglot.com/books/language/klingon.htm), though
they comprise one more or less mutually intelligible language. Attention
to this kind of detail is surely related to the fact that Klingon was
constructed by a talented linguist, [Marc
Okrand](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124224759995316587), whereas the
plotline of the original television series was not.

The other option, a single language for an entire world, has been the
more common hope for futuristic utopians. In [Alexander Bogdanov’s *Red
Star*](http://books.google.com/books?id=0ldgAAAAMAAJ&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=various+dialects),
a 1908 novel depicting a socialist society on Mars, the entire planet
speaks one language. As Menni, the explainer of all things Martian,
tells the narrator: “Long ago, however, several centuries before the
socialist revolution, all the various dialects drew closer to one
another and merged in a single common language. This occurred freely and
spontaneously” (p. 54). It happened on Mars, and — according to Bogdanov
— it happened on Mars *naturally*: without coercion, even without
conscious reflection.

To linguists of today, such monotonic linguistic progress seems
completely wrong-headed. It’s just not how humans use language. Most of
what we know about linguistic behavior suggests that dialect/language
differentiation is an intrinsic corollary of group-formation. Before the
middle of the twentieth century, however, quite respected linguists,
even pioneers in the field like [Otto
Jespersen](http://denmark.dk/en/meet-the-danes/great-danes/scientists/otto-jespersen/)
of Denmark, argued that some kind of convergence, at least in
grammatical structure, was “progressive.” In his fascinating [*The
Philosophy of Grammar*](http://hdl.handle.net/1959.9/202603), he claimed
that features like the trial number form or excessive cases and genders
tend to drop away over time. (The evolution seems to be in the direction
of Jespersen’s scholarly specialty of English and also — somewhat
predictably — toward Danish.) Likewise, Frederick Bodmer’s 1944 classic,
*The Loom of Language* recognizes that there will always be some
fragmentation among languages, but considers some more “modern”
(English) and others more “archaic” (Russian), a characterization
largely based on eliminating or retaining inflections (see p. 420, for
example).

Intelligent and curious laypeople could easily pick up such books and
draw upon this model of future language change. Of course, there were
other linguistic models at play in this moment of the late 1950s and
early 1960s, and I will address those in later essays. My point here is
that a particular vision of increasing homogenization, the creation of a
Global Language, was imaginable, linguistically, in this period in a way
it would not be later.

Although the scholarly consensus on linguistic change no longer supports
this vision of progressive simplification to a single tongue, the idea
continues to appeal to non-specialists. Globalization (of media, of
transportation, of finance, of the Internet) provides the most obvious
reason for the hardiness of this presumption. Anglophones can travel [to
almost any corner of the planet
today](http://www.thehistoryofenglish.com/history_today.html) and never
have to transition out of a language once confined to the southern part
of a particular North Sea island. Why wouldn’t this expansive trend
simply continue? To those sharing this cast of mind, the only thing
stopping it is parochial nationalism. Shed that vestige of pre-modernity
and we are well on our way to bringing Bogdanov’s Mars to Earth.

Which brings us to nuclear war. To some science-fiction authors of the
mid-twentieth-century, only a tremendous conflagration — World War I or
II on steroids — could shatter these atavisms and allow the ostensibly
“natural” state: one language for the world. In this reading,
ironically, nuclear war could *help* the cause of human understanding.
To illustrate this particular vision of how humanity would talk after a
nuclear war, I will focus on two examples, one utopian and one
dystopian.

The utopia is [*The Shape of Things to
Come*](http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks03/0301391h.html), published in
1933 by H. G. Wells (1866-1946), arguably the most influential writer of
science fiction in the English language. I’m somewhat cheating by
selecting this book, because the war depicted in it is not a nuclear war
*per se*, although it is certainly global and utterly devastating. This
slight fudging is perhaps ameliorated by the fact that Wells himself had
coined the phrase “atomic bomb” in his earlier novel of aerial warfare,
[*The World Set
Free*](https://books.google.com/books?id=dgkoAAAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=the+world+set+free&hl=en&sa=X&ei=6sREVZbYHsmgNtb5gcAN&ved=0CCcQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=the%20world%20set%20free&f=false)
(published in 1914). *The Shape of Things to Come* so precisely
prefigured the tropes of nuclear novels — somewhere between [Sepia and
Epic](http://histscifi.com/essays/gordin/languages.html) — that it would
be remiss to omit it on the technicality that it was composed almost a
decade before the first nuclear chain reaction.

The novel presents itself as the blandest of genres, a history textbook.
The trick is that the tome hails from the future (after 2106), glimpsed
by a (imaginary) League of Nations diplomat, Dr. Philip Raven, as he
drifted between slumber and wakefulness. These notes from Dr. Raven’s
twilight state were posthumously edited by Wells into the book before
us. The history is a Whiggish one, written from the point of view of a
global Modern State which has eliminated warfare, money, and poverty.
The teleological narrative begins with the shattered polities of World
War I (to Wells, simply the Great War), descends into a global conflict
(using poison gas) that destroys industrial civilization in the 1940s,
finds order haltingly restored by an Air Dictatorship of futuristic
pilots, and then concludes with the Modern State. (There are a lot of
gaps in the details about how that latter part unfolds, pasted over by
Wells’s “editorial” conceit.) Strewn throughout the text are Wells’s
views on political economy, science, philosophy, race, and much more. I
will concentrate on the linguistic features of the text.

We hear of many languages by the by, but only two receive any sustained
attention: Basic English and “English” (which I put in quotation marks
for reasons that will become obvious). In the aftermath of the war,
languages began, naturally, to evolve closer to each other. [By the late
twentieth
century](http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks03/0301391h.html#chap2_12),
“Spanish and English were already on their way to become the
interchangeable languages they remained throughout all the earlier
twenty-first century.” This is somewhat odd, because Basic English — not
at all interchangeable with Spanish — was the path to future English.

[Basic English](http://ogden.basic-english.org/booksum1.html) was part
of Wells’s cultural milieu. Charles Ogden, an English philosopher and
pundit, together with the literary critic I. A. Richards, proposed a
form of English compressed to a list of [850
words](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Basic_English_word_list),
governed by the rules of standard English grammar. In Wells’s future,
the Air Dictatorship is built up around Basic English, because that is
the language of international air travel. (In fact, in 2008, The
International Civil Aviation Organization
[mandated](http://www.aviation-esl.com/ICAO_English.htm) English —
ordinary, unBasic English — to be the international language of
aviation.) The Basra Conference of 1965 lays the foundation for the
Dictatorship; the Second Basra Conference of 1978 formalizes Basic as a
tool of propaganda and education. (In our Universe, the [Bandung
Conference](https://history.state.gov/milestones/1953-1960/bandung-conf)
of African and Asian states in 1955 also used English as its common
tongue.)

The Modern State speaks English, no longer Basic and no longer our
English either. This makes for a stylistic issue, because *The Shape of
Things to Come* is patently, manifestly, obviously not written in Basic
English or Future English. It’s written in English English, the kind a
man such as Herbert George Wells liked to scribble. Wells ducked the
issue in a parenthetical aside at the beginning of Section 7 of Book 5,
“[Language and Mental
Growth](http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks03/0301391h.html#chap5_07)”. :

<blockquote id="start1"><p>
	I print this section exactly as Raven wrote it down. It is, the reader
	will remark, in very ordinary twentieth-century English. Yet plainly
	if it is a part of a twenty-second-century textbook of general history
	it cannot have been written originally in our contemporary idiom. It
	insists upon a refinement and enlargement of language as if it had
	already occurred, but no such refinement is evident. It must have been
	translated by Raven as he dreamt it into the prose of today. If he saw
	that book of his at all, he saw it not with his eyes but with his
	mind. The actual page could have had neither our lettering, our
	spelling, our phrasing nor our vocabulary.
 </p></blockquote>

<blockquote id="sub1" style="display:none;"><p>
	I print this part right as Raven wrote it down. It is, he who is
	reading will note, in very normal English of the years 1900-2000.
	Yet clearly if it is a part of a school-book of general history of
	the years 2100-2200 it cannot have been written at first in our
	language of now. A cleaning and growth of language is necessary as
	if it had already taken place, but no such cleaning is seen. It must
	have been written in English by Raven as he saw it in his sleep into
	the words of now. If he saw that book of his at all, he saw it not
	with his eyes but with his mind. The true page could not have had
	our letters, our way of writing words, our selection of words or our
	store-house of words.</p>
</blockquote>


This is immediately followed by a description of future English:

<blockquote id="start2"><p>
	 One of the unanticipated achievements of the twenty-first century was
	 the rapid diffusion of Basic English as the lingua franca of the world
	 and the even more rapid modification, expansion and spread of English
	 in its wake. The English most of us speak and write today is a very
	 different tongue from the English of Shakespeare, Addison, Bunyan or
	 Shaw; it has shed the last traces of such archaic elaborations as a
	 subjective mood; it has simplified its spelling, standardized its
	 pronunciation, adopted many foreign locutions and naturalized and
	 assimilated thousands of foreign words. No deliberate attempt was made
	 to establish it as the world language. It had many natural advantages
	 over its chief competitors, Spanish, French, Russian, German and
	 Italian. It was simpler, subtler, more flexible and already more
	 widely spoken, but it was certainly the use of Basic English which
	 gave it its final victory over these rivals.<br><br>
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote id="sub2" style="display:none;"><p>
	One of the surprising developments of the years 2100-2200 was the
    quick distribution of Basic English as the common language of the
    Earth and the even quicker change, growth and distribution of
    English after it. The English most of us speak and write now is a
    very different tongue from the English of Shakespeare, Addison,
    Bunyan or Shaw; it has left off the last marks of such old ornaments
    as writing from a certain person’s point of view; it has made easier
    its way of writing words, made the sound of speaking the same, taken
    on many ways of speaking from other languages and made natural and
    automatic 1000s of words from other countries. No conscious attempt
    was made to force it as the Earth’s language. It had many natural
    good qualities over its chief competition, Spanish, French, Russian,
    German and Italian. It was more simple, more delicate, more elastic
    and already more widely spoken, but it was certainly the use of
    Basic English which gave it its last taking over from this
    competition.</p>
</blockquote>


I suppose Wells couldn’t be bothered to render either passage in Basic English, so I did it for him. <span id="transsent1"> <a href="#" id="trans1">Click here </a> to render each in my basic translation.</span><span id="transsent2" style="display:none"> <a href="#" id="trans2">Click here </a> to restore each passage to its original.</span> It is straightforward to see how Wells epitomized a vision of language that emerged from a hyper-simplification of Jespersen’s description of gradual simplification. Once war smashes nation-states, the peoples of the world are free to speak a unified language, the language of science and technology. Conveniently for Wells, this turns out in his future — as it has [in our present](http://aeon.co/magazine/science/how-did-science-come-to-speak-only-english/) — to be English (although not an English we would recognize right away, given the evolution from Basic English).

<script>
$( "#trans1" ).on("click",function() {
  $( "#start1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#sub1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
  }); 
  $( "#start2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#sub2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
  });
  $( "#transsent1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#transsent2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
  }); 
  return false;
});

$( "#trans2" ).on("click",function() {
  $( "#sub1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#start1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
  }); 
  $( "#sub2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#start2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
  }); 
  $( "#transsent2" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear", function() {
  	$( "#transsent1" ).fadeToggle( "slow", "linear" ); 
}); 
  return false;
});
</script>


My second example, the dystopia, is one of the most uncomfortable of
nuclear novels: [*Farnham’s
Freehold*](http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/title.cgi?6130) (1964) by Robert
A. Heinlein (1907-1988). There is something in this book to offend
everyone. It’s the early 1960s, and we are introduced to the Farnham
family — a nuclear one, of course, with two grown children — and a few
friends. Farnham is ribbed for building a bomb shelter, but this comes
in handy when a nuclear device is detonated overhead, catapulting the
family into the distant future, but in their precise spatial location.
(The physics is left unexplained.) What is at first a survivalist,
Robinson-Crusoe novel (complete with explicit invitations to incest)
turns into a nightmare as the group is enslaved by dark-skinned
overlords. Nuclear war had wiped out the infrastructure of all the
continents except Africa (a trope in several nuclear fictions, such as
Michael Swanwick’s 1980 story “[The Feast of St.
Janis](http://www.baenebooks.com/chapters/1596061781/1596061781___2.htm)”),
and the inverted racial order combines high-tech gizmos with serfdom.
Oh, also, the overlords consume white people for dinner.

One could spend several essays dissecting this book, perhaps the most
controversial in Heinlein’s career of courting controversy, but I will
only focus on his tongue of the future: the elites call it Language.
They force Farnham to learn it in a matter of sixteen days. Part of the
reason he can learn it so quickly is the Pavlovian teaching method (via
electronic whip), but Heinlein makes it clear that Language’s structure
helps. The most difficult things in Language are the elaborate status
markers to indicate whether you are speaking to a superior, inferior, or
equal. Beside that, “Hugh found the language simple and logical. It had
no irregular verbs and its syntax was orderly; it probably had been
tidied up at some time. He suspected, from words that he recognized —
‘simba,’ ‘bwana,’ ‘wazir,’ ‘etage,’ ‘trek,’ ‘oncle’ — that it had roots
in several African languages. But that did not matter; this was ‘Speech’
and, according to his teachers, the only language spoken everywhere”
(160; all references to the 2011 Baen paperback). As Farnham later
learns, Language came from a blend of Swahili, French, and Arabic —
though it includes clicks, which none of these languages do — and he
felt it had been cleaned up, “was as free from traps as Esperanto”
(185). It’s a shame Heinlein didn’t show us any of it.

Heinlein’s model of linguistic change in a post-nuclear world seems
clear enough: languages converge into a creole that eventually becomes
universal. This is not the history of any known language. That’s part of
what Heinlein is getting at — that nuclear war wipes the slate clean,
and old allegiances are replaced with a new order. Language is an
epiphenomenon of the new African hegemony. But it is not how creoles
really work, either, as linguistic objects. It’s perfectly possible to
imagine that two or more languages can combine into a pidgin — say,
borrowing a lot of the lexicon from one language, and aspects of the
syntax from another — and then that such a pidgin could develop into a
full language once children adopt and adapt it as their native language.
What’s not plausible is that a single creole easily standardized in the
same way across geographic space as large as Africa. Heinlein has taken
the fiction of seamless standardization and projected it down from his
global Language to a regional creole. Part of the reason this doesn’t
happen locally has to do with
[code-switching](http://www.tamiu.edu/~rheredia/switch.htm), oscillating
between different dialects or languages. (If you’ve watched Hindi
cinema, think of the way English is deployed at the sentence- or
word-level to develop characters.) Even when creoles take root, the
original languages can persist in some form precisely to allow stylistic
variety. My point is that the diversity is ineluctable, and nuclear war
wouldn’t change that.

The assumption for both Wells and Heinlein was the *naturalness* of
global evolution toward one language. When you removed the barriers,
universal communicability simply would happen. Here is the problematic
part. This doesn’t correlate with what we observe about language, or
even with our own experience. We have all witnessed slang develop
regionally and then sometimes spread, or sometimes not (compare “wicked”
with “OMG” or “fabbo”). Slang identifies sub-groupings, which is why it
does not standardize. Of course, this is part of the reason why people
identify the persistence of linguistic variety with nationalism, but
that is only one subset of group identity. The linguistic change we
notice right now has little to do with nationalism, but it happens all
the same. We can see this, and so could nuclear novelists of the Cold
War era. Writers who were fascinated with the *mutability* of language —
not simply frustrated by its diversity — approached the linguistic
consequences of nuclear war rather differently, as we will see in the
next essay.
