---
title: "Biotechnologies of the Future"
author: Nikolai Krementsov
layout: essay
slug: "biotechnologies-future"
previous: valley
---

> «…"Любовь и голод владеют миром". Ergo: чтобы овладеть миром --
> человек должен овладеть владыками мира».
>
> Евгений Замятин, *Мы* (1920)

The Valley of New Life embodies humanity’s triumph over Nature. The
valley’s inhabitants enjoy technologies yet unheard of in the “old”
world. They use atomic energy, ride super fast “magnetic” trains,
transmit electricity wirelessly, and fly on “electrical wings.” But it
is incredible advances in various *biotechnologies* that make the valley
a true place of the future. Even though Il’in does not use the term in
his novel, the notion of biotechnology held considerable currency in
1920s Russia. In 1922, Mikhail Zavadovskii, one of the leaders of
experimental biology, wrote of “the time, when advances in the study of
living nature will create conditions for the flowering of biotechnology
\[*biotekhnii*\] alongside the technology of dead materials, \[and
when\] the biologist’s tasks in making new life forms, now seem akin to
\[H. G.\] Wells’ fantasy, will be as mundane as those of a construction
engineer.”[^1] Although the narrator apologizes for “possible
inaccuracies” in his descriptions of the biotechnologies available in
the valley, for he “lacks fundamental biological training,” he asserts
that he “cannot avoid biology because it occupies such a prominent place
in everything I had lived through” \[4\]. Indeed, the most astonishing
feature of the Valley of New Life—a new race of human beings, which
comprise its “native” population—is created by the application of new
biotechnologies developed by the valley’s founders.

Furthermore, echoing Zamyatin’s assertion that “love and hunger rule the
world. Ergo, to rule the world, one must master love and hunger,” the
valley’s inhabitants mastered both with the help of biotechnologies.
They conquer hunger through the virtually unlimited production of
synthetic foods, employing a variety of chemical and biological
processes. And they abolish love by first separating sex and
reproduction and then eliminating sex altogether. They reduce human
reproduction to the *in vitro* fertilization of sex cells obtained from
embryonic tissue cultures and the subsequent cultivation of human
embryos in “incubators.” They control sex drive in adults by the careful
application of sex hormones produced by isolated glands of internal
secretion grown in artificial media, thus “eliminating all the sex
characteristics and passions so harmfully affecting modern humans around
the globe” \[63\]. After a few generations, they discontinue the
“production” of females completely, since females “proved to be
unsuitable for the Valley of New Life, because they are physically
weaker and mentally less stable than males” \[63\]. As a result, the
family is no longer the main social grouping of the valley population.
The new human beings have no parents, siblings, spouses, or children,
and thus, experience no emotions and affections associated with such
biological and social roles.

Il’in goes beyond Zamyatin’s vision to answer the questions of WHO and
HOW would rule the world when humanity has mastered love and hunger. Not
surprisingly, the valley’s leading scientists form its governing council
(presided over by the Queensleys). And the main instrument of their
governance is “mind control.” The valley’s founders possess intricate
apparatuses that allow them not only to “read” their subjects’ thoughts,
but also to control their emotions, communicate orders, and inculcate
ideas. In fact, the entire system of education and upbringing of the new
human beings is built upon these *psychotechnologies*.

Yet, as the narrator tells us, “there was nothing fantastic, in the full
sense of the word,” in all the bio- and psychotechnologies employed in
the Valley of New Life: “There were only the advances of science, the
beginnings of which had been known in Europe” \[33\]. Indeed, in his
novel, Il’in compiled a virtual anthology of new research in
experimental biology and medicine conducted during the 1920s by
scientists all over the world, including Russia. He directly referred to
the studies of tissue cultures and organ transplants pioneered by
Franco-American surgeon Alexis Carrel, as well as to the investigations
into the mechanisms of fertilization and embryonic development initiated
by German zoologist Oscar Hertwig. He used the results of extensive
studies on isolated organs, hormones, artificial insemination, vitamins,
interspecies hybridization, cancer, and many other “hot” new subjects,
which captivated the attention of experimental biologists and physicians
at the time. Even the seemingly fantastic notion of “mind control” was
firmly grounded in the extensive contemporary efforts to uncover the
possible mechanisms of hypnosis and telepathy.

Surprising as it may seem, in the early 1920s, Soviet Russia became one
of the world’s leading centers in experimental research on “thought
transfer.”[^2] In August 1918, less than a year after the Bolsheviks had
come to power, Vladimir Durov, a renowned animal trainer and founder of
the country’s most famous animal theater, managed to secure patronage of
the People’s Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros), an agency in
charge of education, arts, and sciences headed by eminent Bolshevik
Anatoly Lunacharskii. Clearly, Durov’s first concern was the survival of
his animals and his theater amidst the turmoil of the Civil War,
epidemics, and famine that came on the tails of the Bolshevik
Revolution.

But he also had other ambitions. Durov believed that his remarkable
achievements in training various animals—not just the usual assortment
of such circus animals as dogs, pigs, and monkeys, but also seals,
lemurs, badgers, and elephants—were based on his ability to command
animals to perform particular tricks *telepathically*. Durov wanted not
merely to continue performances of his animal theater, but to establish
a scientific laboratory to investigate telepathic communications between
humans and animals. Lunacharskii was clearly taken by this idea. He
personally issued a mandate to protect, fund, and expand Durov’s
enterprise. Narkompros even provided Durov with a large mansion
(requisitioned from a prominent Moscow merchant) to house his theater
and the laboratory.[^3]

Furthermore, Lunacharskii apparently asked Vladimir Bekhterev, Russia’s
foremost psychiatrist and neurologist, to check out Durov’s claims and
take part in his investigations. At that very time, Bekhterev was
actively lobbying Narkompros and Lunacharskii personally to accept his
proposal to establish an Institute of Brain Research in Petrograd for
his own studies. He certainly was more than willing to accommodate the
prospective patron. Especially since Bekhterev regularly used hypnosis
in his clinical practice (particularly in the treatment of alcoholism)
and was interested in investigating its possible neural mechanisms.
Whatever Bekhterev’s motivations were, he quickly amended his proposal
to include in his plans a special “department of zoopsychology” to be
directed by Durov.[^4] But Durov declined the offer to join Bekhterev’s
Institute. In the end, Narkompros established the Institute of Brain
Research in Petrograd for Bekhterev and the Practical Laboratory of
Zoopsychology in Moscow for Durov. The two institutions and their
respective heads soon launched collaborative studies.

These first studies were quite simple and consisted of Bekhterev’s
(and/or his co-workers’) observations, which were conducted in both
Petrograd and Moscow, of Durov’s favorite dogs named Mars and Pikki
performing certain tricks. Typically, Durov wrote a sequence of actions
he would command a dog to perform on a piece of paper and gave it to
Bekhterev. He then looked the dog in the eyes for several minutes and
the dog did exactly what Durov had written it should do. Bekhterev was
impressed. In 1920, he devoted a considerable portion of his just
established journal, *Issues in the Studying and Upbringing of
Personality*, to these investigations.[^5] The experiments seemingly
confirmed Durov’s ability to communicate with his animals without using
voice, gestures, facial expressions, or any other observable means. But
they did not answer the questions of how exactly he was able to do it
and what possible mechanisms could underlay these supposedly telepathic
communications.

A plausible hypothesis regarding the mechanisms of “thought transfer”
was not long in coming. On January 6, 1922, a large audience gathered in
the Red Army House of Enlightenment in Moscow to listen to a
“popular-scientific lecture” with the intriguing title “Human
thought—electricity.” The lecturer—engineer Bernard Kazhinskii—told his
audience that human thought was merely a particular form of
electro-magnetic energy generated by nervous cells, which could probably
be registered by a specially designed apparatus. He suggested that a
study of this “mental energy” be conducted “under clinical-laboratory
conditions” to lay a foundation for “psychotechnology”
(*psikhotekhnika*)—a new field of science soon to be advanced by
“engineer-psychologists.”[^6]

Kazhinskii’s lecture was but a theoretical speculation inspired by
recent advances in radio and wireless telegraphy.[^7] It seems unlikely
that a thirty-year old engineer (who had just a few weeks prior come to
Moscow from the provinces in search of employment) actually hoped to
turn his personal “revolutionary dream” of becoming an
“engineer-psychologist” into reality. But his dream did come true. As it
happened, Aleksandr Leontovich, chairman of the physiology department at
Moscow Agricultural Academy and member of Durov’s laboratory, attended
Kazhinskii’s lecture. Leontovich’s scientific interests revolved around
the anatomy, histology, and physiology of the nervous cell. He had no
trouble in visualizing Kazhinskii’s speculations about condensers,
resisters, inductors, and electric circuits in the human brain as
particular structures in different types of nervous cells and their
assemblages he had observed under the microscope in the course of his
own research. In Kazhinskii’s imaginary apparatus, which could register
“mental energy,” Leontovich saw a perfect instrument for investigating
possible mechanisms of Durov’s communications with animals. Durov
apparently shared Leontovich’s enthusiasm. A few months later,
Kazhinskii became a staff member of Durov’s Practical Laboratory of
Zoopsychology. He soon published an updated version of his 1922 lecture
as a brochure, enticingly titled *Thought Transfer*. The brochure’s
cumbersome subtitle revealed that in fact Kazhinskii was searching for
“factors, which make it possible for the nervous system to emit
electromagnetic waves*.*”[^8]

The same year, Kazhinskii’s search received an unexpected boost:
renowned physicist Petr Lazarev, member of the Russian Academy of
Sciences and director of the Institute of Biophysics established in 1920
under the auspices of the People’s Commissariat of Health Protection
(Narkomzdrav), published his “ionic theory of excitation.”[^9] Supported
by Lazarev’s decade-long experiments, this theory explained various
electrical phenomena observed in nervous and muscle tissues (such as the
propagation of electrical impulses along the neuron, for instance) as
the result of the changing concentrations of ions within and without the
living cell. Lazarev’s theory thus provided a plausible physico-chemical
mechanism that could explain the generation of electro-magnetic waves by
the brain, and hence—telepathy and hypnosis. As Lazarev himself put it,
“every sensory or motor act originating in the brain must be emitted
into the outside environment in the form of an electromagnetic wave. …
\[This\] allows us to understand the mechanism of hypnosis: … an
electromagnetic wave generated by the nervous centers of one individual
induces in the \[nervous\] centers of another individual an
\[electromagnetic\] impulse that starts an oscillating reaction in the
centers and generates excitation.”[^10]

In early 1924, Durov published a 500-page volume, *Animal Training*,
that detailed his concept of telepathic communications between humans
and animals, supplemented by the protocols of his experiments conducted
from 1919 to 1923. The volume also incorporated Lazarev’s ideas about
the possible mechanisms of telepathy, as well as Kazhinskii’s schemes
regarding the practical ways of studying it.[^11] It was but a short
step from Kazhinskii’s proposal to create an apparatus for receiving and
recording of “brain waves” to the idea of an apparatus that could
amplify and transmit such waves. In an epilogue to his book, tellingly
titled “My ‘scientific fantasy’,” Durov boldly took this step,
envisioning a future in which such apparatuses would become “a powerful
means to create better thoughts and ideas for humanity and leave no
place for harmful thoughts and ideas, which run contrary to the
interests of masses, large collectives, and ultimately the laborers of
the entire world.”[^12]

Il’in’s novel thus captures a particular preoccupation with
technological/engineering solutions to the issues of human nature and
human destiny, which permeated 1920s Russia. Biotechnology and
psychotechnology together constitute the very foundations of his “valley
of new life.” Given Il’in’s professional interests, he was undoubtedly
familiar with a large body of experimental research related to the
issues of reproduction, internal secretions, sex, and embryonic
development. After all, the specialized medical and biological journals
he must have read regularly (from the *Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology* to the *New Surgical Archive* to the *Journal of
Experimental Biology and Medicine*) were full of publications on these
subjects, as were the proceedings of various professional conferences he
attended. And this specialized knowledge visibly informs his fictional
depictions of the biotechnologies used to create the new human race. But
it seems highly unlikely that Il’in read Bekhterev’s journal, or Durov’s
monograph, not to mention Kazhinskii’s and Lazarev’s treatises. How then
could he possibly learn of their studies on telepathy to render their
results and promises in his novel?

**3. From Science to Fiction via Mass Media**

\[*To be continued*\]

[^1]: M. M. Zavadovskii, *Pol i razvitie ego priznakov* (Moscow: GIZ,
    1922), 235.

[^2]: Extensive English-language literature on the history of “psychical
    research” deals predominantly with Western Europe and the United
    States and is almost completely silent about similar developments in
    Russia. See, for instance, a recent special issue of *Studies in
    History and Philosophy of Science* devoted to the subject and its
    editor’s introduction: Andreas Sommer, “Psychical research in the
    history and philosophy of science. An introduction and review,”
    *Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
    Sciences*, 2014, vol. 48 (Part A): 38-45.

[^3]: A large collection of documents related to the establishment of
    Durov’s laboratory is preserved among the Narkompros materials
    housed in the State Archive of the Russian Federation
    (hereafter—GARF), fond 2307.

[^4]: Materials pertaining to the establishment of Bekhterev’s institute
    could also be found in GARF, fond 2307 and 482.

[^5]: See V. M. Bekhterev, “Ob opytakh nad ‘myslennym’ vozdeistviem na
    povedenie zhivotnykh,” *Voprosy izucheniia i vospitaniia lichnosti*,
    1920, 2: 230-265. Almost thirty years later, an abridged English
    translation of this work appeared in the United States, see W.
    Bechterew, “"Direct Influence" of a Person upon the Behavior of
    Animals,” *Journal of Parapsychology*, 1949, 13(3): 166-176.

[^6]: Materials pertaining to Kazhinskii’s lecture are preserved in the
    Documental Archive of the Moscow Polytechnic Museum. I am profoundly
    grateful to Galina Savina for alerting me to this source and
    providing copies of relevant documents.

[^7]: Since Heinrich R. Hertz’s discovery of electromagnetic waves, the
    hypothesis of “brain waves” became a mainstay of “psychical
    research.” The analogy between telepathy and radio was very popular
    in the 1920s and 1930s. See, for instance, Ferdinando Cazzamalli,
    “Fenomeni telepsichici e radio onde cerebrali,” *Neurologica*, 1925,
    vol. 42: 193-218; Upton Sinclair, *Mental Radio* (New York: Albert &
    Charles Boni, 1930); Giuseppe Calligaris, *Telepatia. Radio onde
    cerebrali* (Milano: Hoepli Editore, 1934).

[^8]: B. B. Kazhinskii, *Peredacha myslei: Faktory, sozdaiushchie
    vozmozhnost’ vozniknoveniia v nervnoi sisteme elektromagnitnykh
    kolebanii, izluchaiushchikhsia naruzhu* (Moscow: Novaia derevnia,
    1923).

[^9]: P. P. Lazarev, *Ionnaia teoriia vozbuzhdeniia* (Moscow: GIZ,
    1923).

[^10]: Ibid, 129.

[^11]: V. V. Durov, *Dressirovka zhivotnykh. Psikhologicheskie
    nabliudeniia nad zhivotnymi dressirovannymi po moemu metodu
    (40-letnii opyt). Novoe v zoopsikhologii* (Moscow: Universal’noe
    izdatel’stvo, 1924).

[^12]: Ibid, 306.
