---
title: "Between Science and Fiction"
subtitle: "Fedor Il’in’s The Valley of New Life (1928)"
author: Nikolai Krementsov
layout: essay
next: biotechnologies
slug: valley
---

In 1928, one of the few remaining private publishers in Moscow released
a novel with the intriguing title, *The Valley of New Life*.[^1] The
book’s back cover bore a bold announcement:

“Citizens! Do you know that all of you are in great danger? Do you know
that a band of determined people, hiding in an isolated valley in the
Himalayas—the so-called valley of “New Life”—has long been plotting a
horrific coup?! Using powerful, unknown to us technical inventions, they
have created a millions-strong army of artificial people and equipped it
with terrible weapons. All the preparations for the coup are finished.
The band’s leaders only await the completion of a tunnel that would
connect the valley with the outside world. Soon the tunnel will be ready
and the iron battalions of half-people-half-machines will attack the
stunned humankind. The danger is near! Everybody should know about it.
Everyone must buy and read this book that describes this outrageous
plot.”

Despite its clear advertising tenor, the blurb quite accurately
describes the book’s contents. Narrated by one of the valley’s
inhabitants, the novel indeed portrays a new civilization created by a
clan of American billionaires, the Queensleys, with the help of leading
scientists and engineers from around the world. They populate the valley
with a race of super-advanced human beings, brought to life by in vitro
fertilization, interspecies hybridization, and ectogenesis (gestation of
human embryos in artificial wombs) and “educated” by means of telepathic
mass hypnosis. According to the Queensleys' vision, this race—armed with
superior science and technology, including the use of atomic energy,
synthetic foods, and mind control—is destined to conquer and remake the
world. The novel ends with the miraculous escape of its narrator from
the valley on the eve of the invasion of the world by the army of the
super-humans. The novel’s content indicates that the published text was
just the first installment of a larger story. However, readers excited
by the novel waited in vain for its sequel. In its full form, the
two-part novel would appear only forty years later.

*The Valley of New Life* is a fine example of a new literary
genre—*nauchnaia fantastika*, scientific fantasy (SF), as it was called
in Russian (or science fiction in English)—that took newborn Soviet
Russia by storm. It echoes certain elements of Eugenii Zamiatin's famous
anti-utopia [*We*](http://books.google.com/books?isbn=0307432866) (1921)
and presages many of the themes of Aldous Huxley's even more famous
[*Brave New World*](http://books.google.com/books?id=zyePPwAACAAJ)
(1932). But in one particular respect the novel differs from the
multitude of SF writings flooding Soviet periodicals and bookstores at
the time: hiding under the penname Theo Elie, its author was a
scientist. The novel was written by Fedor Il'in (1873-1959), the
chairman of the gynecology department at Baku University’s Medical
School.

Il’in’s previous career gave very little indication that he might aspire
to become the author of a successful SF novel. Born to a family of the
Russian nobility, Fedor graduated in 1898 from the country’s premier
medical school—the Military-Medical Academy in St. Petersburg (renamed
Petrograd in 1914). He spent nearly a decade as a doctor with various
army and navy regimens. During the 1904-05 Russo-Japanese war he served
on a military cruiser and was twice decorated for “bravery and exemplary
service under enemy fire.” But, after the end of the war, in 1906, Il’in
resigned from the military. He chose to continue his career in a field
that could not have been more remote from his previous duties: he joined
the staff of the Clinical Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology in St.
Petersburg. He became engaged in experimental research on exciting new
subjects: the use of radium and X-ray irradiation in the treatment of
cancerous tumors and the use of artificial insemination as a means to
fight infertility.[^2] He also began lecturing on his new specialty at
the Petrograd Women’s Medical School.

The October 1917 Bolshevik coup in Petrograd and the bloody Civil War
that came on its tails disrupted Il’in’s research and his steadily
progressing career. As did many other inhabitants of the Imperial
capital, he fled to the country’s southern regions—a stronghold of the
“White” forces fighting against the Bolshevik “Red” army. But unlike
many others, Il’in did not emigrate when, in late 1920, the Bolsheviks
won the Civil War. Instead, at the beginning of 1921, he returned to
Petrograd hoping to resume his research and teaching. Alas, it was not a
propitious time for scientific work in Petrograd, and in 1922, Il’in
accepted an offer to organize a gynecology department at the medical
school of a new university just established in Baku, the center of the
oil industry on the Caspian Sea. He would spend the rest of his life in
Baku, heading the department he had created, teaching successive cohorts
of medical students, and attending to numerous patients at the
university’s clinics.

Il’in’s novel raises a number of interesting questions. Why would this
talented researcher and devoted physician, who earned the title of
“Women’s God” from his grateful patients, pick up his pen to write an SF
novel? What did his novel actually say about science and the scientist?
How did Il'in's specialized scientific/medical knowledge inform and
shape his fiction? How did his vision of humanity's future differ from
that envisaged by other scientists and by professional writers? What
does the very fact that Il'in wrote fiction tell us about the
interrelations between science and literature? And how did such
interrelations in Bolshevik Russia differ from those in other countries?
In the following pages I will look for answers to these questions. The
first section will briefly describe three different revolutions that
defined the contexts of Ili’in’s novel: the Bolshevik Revolution, the
experimental revolution in the life sciences, and the revolution in the
public visibility of biomedical research. The second section will
explore the biomedical advances portrayed in Il’in’s novel within the
context of contemporary research conducted by Russian scientists,
including Il’in himself. The last section will explore social anxieties
(both hopes and fears) generated by biomedical research and examined in
Il’in’s novel.

By analyzing Il’in’s novel in its multiple contexts, I will examine two
intertwined cultural processes unfolding in Bolshevik Russia during this
period. One was the transformation of specialized, esoteric knowledge
generated by biomedical research into an influential *cultural
resource*. Another was the formation of a *zone of contest* at the
interface of four major cultural domains: religion, science, philosophy,
and literature. SF literature provided a critical medium for these two
processes and contributed substantially to an unprecedented increase in
the *public visibility* and *cultural authority* of science in Bolshevik
Russia, at the expense of the visibility and authority enjoyed by
religion and literature during the pre-revolutionary decades.

**Part 1. Science in revolutions**

In the 1920s Bolshevik Russia, a newborn, was imbued by what US
historian Richard Stites has perceptively termed “revolutionary dreams”
of building a “new world.”[^3] Inspired by these dreams, the country
experimented on an unprecedented scale with new ideas and new practices
in every facet of life, from arts to sciences, state administration to
education, and industry to health care. Nowhere did these dreams find a
more pronounced expression than in the numerous works of a new literary
genre: scientific fantasy (SF) . As its very name indicates, this genre
embodied the intersection of two major cultural domains—science and
literature—with practitioners in both fields actively contributing to
its enormous popularity. A large portion of 1920s SF literature engaged
with one particular subset of science—what today is called the life
sciences, but at the time was represented by the two closely entwined
and rapidly growing fields of experimental biology and experimental
medicine.

In the first two decades of the twentieth century, just as Russia was
going through its brutal political revolutions, these fields were
undergoing their own revolution. The “experimental” modifiers to biology
and medicine allude to the essence of this “mini” revolution: the
introduction of methods, largely borrowed from physics and chemistry,
into the study of life, its past, present, and future. Armed with these
new methods, scientists investigated the mechanisms of basic life
processes and their pathological changes, including metabolism,
reproduction, heredity, nervous and endocrine regulation, immunity,
growth, evolution, and aging. The advances of experimental research
quickly found applications in various branches of medicine, leading to
new therapeutic treatments, surgical procedures, preventive measures,
and diagnostic techniques. In the first decades of the twentieth
century, successes in organ transplantation, immunization, blood
transfusion, serodiagnostics, hormone-, vitamin-, X-ray-, and
sera-therapies, and in deciphering the basic mechanisms of heredity and
embryonic development generated a euphoric vision: science could
*control* life and *create* new life forms.[^4] Captivated by this
“visionary biology,” as US historian of science Mark B. Adams has aptly
named it, many scientists the world over came to believe that new
experimental techniques could provide them with the means not only to
radically improve the present well-being of humanity, but to direct its
future evolution.[^5] Russian scientists were no exception. Numerous
investigators, including Il’in, became engaged in research on a variety
of new biomedical subjects. After he had resigned from the military,
much of his research was conducted on the cutting edge of the growing
field of experimental medicine.

The 1917 Bolshevik Revolution gave Russian experimental biology and
medicine a tremendous boost. “Visionary biology” resonated strongly with
the “revolutionary dreams” entertained by the Bolshevik government that
became the only patron of science in the country. Not only did the
Bolsheviks generously fund a massive institutional growth of these
fields, they also made knowledge generated by biomedical research an
essential part of their huge science-popularization campaign aimed at
undermining religion, thus leading to the rapidly increasing public
visibility of such research in the newborn, Bolshevik Russia.[^6]

The intersections of visionary biology and revolutionary dreams found
expression in particular research agendas pursued by Russian scientists
after the Revolution. One dominant agenda became the exploration of the
possible mechanisms and plausible directions of human physical and
mental evolution. Several researchers developed novel techniques of in
vitro fertilization, artificial insemination, and interspecies
hybridization, which seemed to offer simple means of manipulating and
directing human reproduction to any desirable end. Others launched
extensive experimental research on telepathy, which promised to uncover
the “secrets of the mind” and to create effective tools of mind control.
Widely covered by the media (including daily newspapers, popular
magazines, radio broadcasts, and documentary films) this research
generated acute societal anxieties (both hopes and fears) about the
powers unleashed by the rapid advances of biomedical science. It was
these anxieties that Russian post-revolutionary SF literature attempted
to investigate, and Il’in’s *Valley of New Live* undoubtedly was one of
such attempts.

[*To be continued*]

[^1]: Teo Eli, *Dolina novoi zhizni* (Moscow: Krug, 1928).

[^2]: See F. N. Il’in, *Dal’neishie uspekhi v terapii luchistoi
    energiei* (St. Petersburg: Orbita, 1914); idem, *Iskusstvennoe
    oplodotvorenie v bor’be s besplodiem zhenshchiny* (St. Petersburg:
    Orbita, 1917).

[^3]: Richard Stites, *Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and
    Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 1989).

[^4]: Philip J. Pauly, *Controlling Life: Jacques Loeb and the
    Engineering Ideal in Biology* (New York: Oxford University Press,
    1987).

[^5]: On “visionary biology” see Mark B. Adams, “Last Judgment: The
    Visionary Biology of J. B. S. Haldane,” *Journal of the History of
    Biology*, 2000, 33: 457-91.

[^6]: For details, see Nikolai Krementsov, *Revolutionary Experiments:
    The Quest for Immortality in Bolshevik Science and Fiction* (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2013).

