---
title: "The Frozen Few"
author: W. Patrick McCray
layout: essay
slug: "frozen-few"
previous: "cryonics"
---

It’s an old joke. A physicist, a chemist, and an economist find
themselves stranded on an island. They have some water but, for food,
there’s just cans of tuna fish. But they have no can opener. The
physicist sketches a Rube Goldberg-ian device in the sand to smash cans
open. But this, his colleagues say, would scatter the food. The chemist
offers to make an acid that will eat away the cans. But this would
render the food poisonous. They sit. They fret. And then the economist
leaps to his feet and shouts “I’ve got it!” What?” his friends ask.
“Let’s assume,” he says, “that we have a can opener.”

It’s an old joke. But it’s funny – mocking the pretensions of those who
proffer solutions premised on assumptions that are often unrealistic or
perhaps even nonexistent. The cryonics community made a similar leap of
imagination in the 1980s.

A decade earlier, organizations like the Life Extension Society, the
Cryonics Institute, and the Alcor Society had sprung up to meet the
wishes of a small group of people – call them the frozen few – who
wanted to have their bodies frozen after their passing. **{link to my
first essay}** But cryonicists rested their hopes on some very vague
assumptions about the future. Less a resurrection strategy, theirs was
an attempt to redefine death until medical science could cure what ailed
them.

Already just over the fringe of respectability, the cryonics community
hit an iceberg-sized obstacle in 1979. For years, Bob Nelson, a
television repairman and president of the Cryonics Society of
California, had maintained that nine “patients” entrusted to his care
were safely preserved in large dewars at a cemetery in Chatsworth. What
he did *not* maintain was the necessary supply of liquid nitrogen. The
result was [predictable and gruesome](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/354/mistakes-were-made). National news coverage, lawsuits, and large jury settlement against Nelson followed.

Cryonics went into a deep hibernation. It stayed that way until 1984
when its advocates a new lease on life.

When cryonicists first began organizing, they could offer no convincing
explanation for how suspended patients/customers might experience their
high-tech revival. They assumed that somehow medical technology would
advance enough to make this possible, but lacked a concrete mechanism.

Then the cryonics community found its can opener. It was called
nanotechnology.

The original standard bearer for nanotechnology was K. Eric Drexler. A
graduate of MIT, in 1981, he published a peer-reviewed article in the
*Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences* titled "[Molecular Engineering](http://www.pnas.org/content/78/9/5275.abstract)." As an undergraduate student, Drexler was heavily involved in the grassroots pro-space movement of the 1970s, writing articles space colonies, asteroid mining, and [solar sails](http://www.patrickmccray.com/2015/01/27/exploratory-engineering-and-solar-sailing/). Drexler’s attentions gradually migrated to what he called “molecular engineering.”[^1] His *PNAS* article described a general concept for
“protein machines” which, directed by computer code, could
self-replicate. Able to build or construct almost anything, Drexler
predicted that molecular engineering could open a door to
environmentally benign manufacturing and future health applications.
Full of radical ideas but short on specific scientific details,
Drexler’s early writings described a technological future in which
engineers had precise control over the material world. Most critically
for cryonicists, Drexler’s *PNAS* article alluded to the possibility
that future molecular devices might be able to repair frozen or damaged
tissue.

Nanotechnology (the term wasn’t Drexler’s but he deserves credit for
popularizing it in the mid-1980s) revived the revivalists. As a result,
cryonicists became one of the first communities – Bay Area software
engineers were another – to enthusiastically embrace what were among the
most speculative ideas about nanotechnology.

In August 1984, for example, Mike Darwin (his original surname was
Federowicz), who served as president of the Alcor Life Extension
Foundation from 1983 to 1988, wrote an article in *Cryonics*, his
organization’s [monthly newsletter](http://www.alcor.org/CryonicsMagazine/index.html). “I think about my efforts to stop the inexorable fall toward nothingness,” he wrote, “I
think about the waiting not so much as I think about the future.” But,
he confided, he felt “better now about tomorrow” than he had for years.
“I can thank Eric Drexler for that. I can thank him for a fresh new
vision of tomorrow where molecular machines exist and scraps of people
grow whole and walk the earth again.”[^2]

Darwin owed his gratitude to a draft version of Drexler’s first book
that circulated among some n the cryonics community. This “very
excellent manuscript” detailed the “kind of technology which will likely
be required to revive us.”[^3] Drexler’s draft, then called *The Future
by Design*, eventually became his strong-selling 1986 book *The Engines
of Creation*. Two decades earlier, Drexler’s publisher, Doubleday, had
brought Robert Ettinger’s *[The Prospect of Immortality](http://www.cryonics.org/images/uploads/misc/Prospect\_Book.pdf)* 
wide public attention. Likely a coincidence, this juxtaposition
nonetheless provides a lovely symmetry, given how enthusiastically the
cryonics community embraced Drexler’s vision for nanotechnology. Over
the next several years, almost every issue of *Cryonics* carried some
mention of Drexler and nanotechnology.

In May 1985, some 60 people from the U.S. and overseas traveled to Lake
Tahoe for the 4^th^ Life Extension Festival. After listening to
presentations with titles like “Why Keep Living?” and “Heat Flow in the
Cryonic Suspension of Humans,” Drexler delivered a much-anticipated talk
he called “Molecular Technology and Cell Repair Machines.”[^4]
Subsequently reprinted in Alcor’s magazine, Drexler described a
“technology that seems to be clearly able to make it possible for people
to live indefinitely in perfect health.” But, failing that, this
as-yet-to-be-invented technology held out the possibility of repairing
tissue damaged by cryonic suspension. One conference attendee reported
that Drexler, himself now a member of Alcor, “led people from
nano-technology to cryonics.” Anecdotal evidence bears this out. In the
next few years, at least three people attributed their hope and
confidence in cryo-suspension to Drexler’s vision of the technological
future. As one reader told *Cryonics*, “Having read K. Eric Drexler’s
book, *Engines of Creation*, my wife Carol and have decided to become
full Alcor members.”[^5]

Alcor’s own [data](http://www.alcor.org/Library/html/stats-members.html) supports this. For much of the late 1970s and into the mid-1980s, the number of “suspension members” – people who had signed up to be cryo-preserved – flat-lined. A [noticeable revival](http://www.alcor.org/AboutAlcor/membershipstats.html) in membership occurred around 1986, the timing of which coincides with the appearance of Drexler’s *Engines* and his successful popularization of nanotechnology. 

Drexlerian nanotechnology remained popular with cryonics enthusiasts. A
survey of Alcor members undertaken in 1988 provides some rough
sociological data – although somewhat limited due to the relatively
small sample size – about *who* constituted the cryonics community. When
it came to reading materials, over three-fourths of respondents said
they had read *Engines*, a number that surpassed those who had read
Ettinger’s own book which had been, of course, cryonics *ur*-text.

Californians continued to make up the largest fraction of Alcor’s
membership in the 1990s.[^6] The possibility of life extension via
cryonics enjoyed an especially warm reception among the Silicon Valley’s
high tech culture. As a feature in the *San Jose Mercury News* reported,
it was logical for cryonics to appeal to Silicon Valley engineers and
programmers. For them, it was explained, “technology is everything.” The
article went on to profile several “nerds on ice”, early adopters who
“will accept and dive into things before it \[sic\] is widely
accepted.”[^7]

For some technophiles this enthusiasm extended to the radical vision of
nanotechnology that Drexler popularized as well as cryonics. The
actualization of both of these technologies still waited over the
temporal horizon. But, for many cryonicists, the possibility of cheating
death had come to rest on the precarious assumption that sufficiently
robust nanotechnology might one day exist to bring them back to life.

Throughout the history of technology, we find other examples of how the
development of one technology follows from another. The confluence of
cryonics and nanotechnology shows how people’s *visions* of the
technological future were likewise coupled, like railroad cars making
their way over the horizon. One had to go before the other. As
cryonicists redefined life extension in the 1980s, the future of
cryonics required that nanotechnology happen first. Cryonicists might be
able to place their friends, family and themselves into large, liquid
nitrogen-filled dewars. But only the can opener of nanotechnology would
get them out.

[^1]: This term originally served as the title of a speculative 1955
    article by Arthur von Hippel, an MIT professor who wrote about the
    design of future materials. Arthur von Hippel, “Molecular
    Engineering,” *Science*, 123 (1956), 315-17.

[^2]: Quotes from p. 24-25 of *Cryonics*, \#49, August 1984.

[^3]: *Cryonics*, \#45, April 1984, 6.

[^4]: Described in the August 1985 issue of *Cryonics*.

[^5]: From p. 17 of December 1989 issue of *Cryonics*.

[^6]: Michael Cieply, “They Freeze Death If Not Taxes*,” Los Angeles
    Times*, September 9, 1990.

[^7]: Tim Larimer, “The Next Ice Age,” *West* (magazine supplement to
    the San Jose Mercury News), December 9, 1990, 17-26.
