---
title: "The Clock is Ticking"
author: Michelle Murphy
layout: essay
slug: "clock-is-ticking"
previous: phantasmagrams-of-population
---

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1e8xgF0JtVg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br>
“We have a situation,” a 2010 promotional video for the Girl Effect
campaign informs us. The clock is ticking on the future life chances of
girls. What happens in girlhood will trigger two possible cascades of
correlation. In the dystopic cascade, she is married at 14, pregnant by
15, faced with sex work to support her family, which in turn puts her at
risk of “contracting and spreading” HIV. In the utopic cascade, she is
“happy and healthy” and stays in school, which allows her to escape sex
work and earn a leaving from her education, which in turn allows her to
“call the shots” so she can avoid HIV and choose when she marries and
has children. The utopic girl then passes on her good fortune to her
children, who then pass it on to future generations, thereby “impacting
the world.” Thus, girlhood offers an urgent window for pre-emption.

According to the promissory of the girl effect, the cascade of good
outcomes can be triggered by a well-timed “investment” in a girl. In the
[Girl Effect](http://www.girleffect.org/), life is temporized in terms
of risk pools, investment potentials, and rates of return. Thus, we can
distinguish the futurity as posited by modernization theory
(undergirding the demographic transition) with its sense of directing an
uncertain unfolding of historical time, from the futurity of
financialized speculation that seeks to stimulate or pre-empt particular
probabilities for the sake of a predicted payback.

At the turn of the millennium, the Girl Effect had spread to become a
dominant logic shaping transnational development.[^31] Merging financial
speculation with feminism, the Girl Effect was first put forward by the
[Nike Foundation in 2008](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WIvmE4_KMNw)
as a new feminist form of development. It considers girls a kind of
human capital with the possibility of high rates of return, regularly
lauded as “the best investment in the developing world.”[^32] Investment
in a girl usually takes the form of primary school education. The idea
of Girl Effect builds on work from the 1990s by economists at the [World Bank (led by Lawrence Summers](http://www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/1992/05/01/000009265_3961003011714/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf))
who had calculated that educating girls reduced fertility for less cost
than directly funding family planning.

The returns on investing in girls are manifold: they accrue to the
future woman the girl will someday become, as well as her progeny, and
her nation-state. The returns come in the form of a cascade of good
effects, from her reduced fertility, to her increased future wages, and
her better health (and hence reduced drain on national resources), as
well as contributions to the well-being of her community, and increased
success as an entrepreneur. Future reduced fertility and increased
wages, moreover, have direct mathematical effects on the calculation of
GDP per capita, which is another kind of speculative benefit for the
nation-state as a whole. In the boosterism of Girl Effect promotions,
the cascade of good effects spreads to the entire globe, offering a way
out of our current economic and political “mess.”

The Girl Effect’s analysis of this chain of outcomes is based on a thick
archive of data produced by decades of social science family planning
and development research (including explicitly feminist work) about
girls.[^33] This archive of research offers a multitude of correlations
between girls’ fertility, labor, health, literacy, gender status, and so
on. This dispersed literature of correlation is gathered by the Girl
Effect and re-narrated as a single cascade that is then elevated an
abstract model making claims about girls in general and everywhere, and
not a statistical prediction about any given girl life. The girl effect
offers another example of a phantasmagram. Generated by the thick data
of postcolonial development, the Girl Effect dreams a speculative future
where all postcolonial poor girls have become sites of good investment
that can trigger a chain reaction with the potential to transform the
economy of the entire world.

The promissory of the Girl Effect is largely directed at Western donor
communities, policy makers, and transnational agencies. Its appeal is
partially that it offers a vision of “empowering girls” in synchrony
with the logics of speculative capital. Grounded development workers in
local NGOs are not so romantic about the possibility of easily
“unleashing change,” even if the resources that flow through the Girl
Effect, and its shifting of development priorities from reducing
fertility directly to encouraging education, are welcome.[^34]

Within development policy arenas, the Girl Effect is conjured using two
practices: quantification and animation. If the trust that animates
numbers is not a given, but needs to be generated, Girl Effect campaigns
have refined the art of mobilizing feeling with video, graphic design,
and music. Significantly, the Girl Effect has helped to crystalize a new
visual vocabulary for development promotions.[^35] Replacing realist
photos and film of suffering brown bodies, the Girl Effect is brought to
life through colorful animation, lively pie charts, [stop motion
filming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gy7N2G_Hz_Y), [aestheticized
numbers,](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMErh8luzSE) and ebullient
music. Through energetic, if cartoonish, graphic design, the thick
archive of postcolonial data is re-presented as animated [charged data
points](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NaTfX2H7puc) that can be
[“unleashed”](http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/video/2013/jul/15/maria-eitel-girl-effect-nike)
into a future of speculative prosperity. [The data and
statistics](https://vimeo.com/48163647) do not so much persuade as
provoke feelings, including feminist dreams of a better life for girls.

The excited videos with swelling musical scores can be hard to resist.
They attach to aspiration and fear, hope and anxiety for the future of
children, as well as a liberal political cosmology that extolls the idea
that a single individual can make a difference. This dream of a better
future that links poor children with the economic future of the planet,
can be triggered if the right investment is made now in the form of
micro-credit loans, electronic bank accounts accessed through cell
phones, or access to primary schooling. The chain reaction just waits to
be unleashed.

The Girl Effect has become a potent phantasmagram, spreading to
corporate responsibility campaigns of [Walmart](https://www.clintonfoundation.org/blog/2014/04/29/how-walmart-reimagining-its-investments-empower-girls-and-women),
[Exxon](http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/community/womens-economic-opportunity/investing-in-women),
and
[Intel,](http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/technology-in-education/smart-girls-smart-world-video.html)
shaping policy at the Gates Foundation, [the Clinton Foundation,](https://www.clintonfoundation.org/blog/authors/no-ceilings-full-participation-project)
the
[UN](http://www.unfoundation.org/what-we-do/issues/women-and-population/investing-adolescent-girls.html),
and even the office of the [US Secretary of State](http://www.state.gov/s/gwi/girls/). It is embraced by
longstanding transnational NGOs like Plan and Care, as well as the
biggest NGO in the world, BRAC, based in Bangladesh. A 2008 [marketing report by Goldman Sachs](http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/investing-in-women/bios-pdfs/women-half-sky-pdf.pdf)
echoes the findings of the World Bank and the Nike Foundation, reporting
that investing in educating girls has a “growth premium” that at a
macroeconomic level stimulates “higher productivity; higher

returns to investment; higher agricultural yields; and a more favorable
demographic structure.”[^36] Annotated with their standard
forward-looking disclosure statement in small font, the report hedges
its bets: “Past performance is not a guide to future performance. Future
returns are not guaranteed.”[^37] In speculative finance, the
opportunity for high returns comes with high risk. Poor girls are
extraordinarily risky subjects, and it is this intensity of
“under-invested” risk that speculative finance transmutes into
potential. This vision of girls as a well for speculative finance is
captured by Intel, in its Girl Rising campaign, which poses a young
beaming South American indigenous girl with a sign reading “I am the
emerging market.”


<figure>
![](/images/Murphy-4-1.png)
<figcaption></figcaption>
</figure>

At the turn of the millennium, girls in sites as diverse as Peru,
Bangladesh, and Uganda have been gathered together by the Girl Effect as
agents of a new speculative future, part feminist, part finance. What
happens when the math does not add up? When girls are no longer the best
investment? Little is said in Girl Effect dreamscapes about the boys
that are brothers to these investable girls. Poor brown boys do not
often get aspirational speculative futures in this Western dreamscape of
uncertain futures. Instead, they are more likely to be mentioned
fearfully as sites of danger, [as incipient agents of violence](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/12/opinion/sunday/nicholas-kristof-smart-girls-vs-bombs.html?_r=0)
through the lens of foreign policy aimed at a war against the never
ending potential of [future terrorism.](http://m.state.gov/mc36630.htm)

Poor racialized girls living in postcolonial locals have perversely
become iconic figures of speculation on which elite technocratic dreams
of planetary economics, national development, and security have become
attached. The Girl Effect projects a potent mix of firmative and
affirmative speculation, where grassroots organizations, Western liberal
feminist imaginaries, and financial logics come together to dream forms
of investable and uninvestable life. Technoscience does dream futures.
Yet these dreams emanate from non-innocent infrastructures of social
science practice, acting as phantasma projected onto The Girl as if she
was the source of this dreaming.

Feminist science studies has long wrestled with the formative and
affirmative possibilities of technoscience, as can be seen in the work
of Donna Haraway, Alondra Nelson, and Karen Barad. The feminist science
studies scholar and biologist Banu Subramaniam brings affirmative
speculation into the domain of science in her book *Ghost Stories for
Darwin* in a way that echoes with the vision in *Sultana’s Dream*.
Discussing her research on plant variation in both India and the US,
Subramaniam’s book includes the ghosts of past colonial, racist and
sexist violence as active agents in contemporary science, and even
further, includes dreams of a “futureworld of alternative science” for
South Asian girls doing science. Subramaniam argues that the task of an
aspirational science needs “fictional sciences” that have the capacity
of “imagining other configurations of knowledge making, reconstructing
alternative inter- and a-disciplinary lenses, new conceptual practices,
and more engaging plots and stories that are located in the
interdisciplinary fissues of the sciences and humanities.”[^38] Her book
gives further hope that it is possible to be awake in the dream. This
essay, too, has attempted to be awake to the dreamscapes of
technoscience. It suggests that attending to the history of phantasma
and the palablability of speculation is not only a necessary critical
task, but also a way to engage affirmatively with technoscience as it
conjures worlds with and through us.

Whether in the early twentieth century speculative fiction of Sultana’s
Dream, in the mid-century simulations of population control, or in the
21st century phantasma of the investable girl, technoscience helps to
miraculate the dreamscapes of intangible phenomena that we inhabit. To
suggest that technoscience dreams is not meant to denigrate dreaming but
to recognize intangible imaginaries and our attachments to them as one
of technoscience’s most significant products. What would it look like to
be awake to the importance of intangibles enlivened by technoscience in
our everyday world? Technoscientific dreaming, while so often oriented
towards the speculative future, has had profound and concrete effects in
the present. And yet, it can be very difficult to awaken to the dream.
That is, it is difficult to awaken to the deeply contingent condition of
so many of the phenomena that have become the habitual surround of
political and technical life. It is difficult to awaken to more
affirmative dreams that might summon less violent, more open futures
with and not just about women and girls.[^39]

Technoscience often dreams firmatively. So often, the phantasma of
technoscience do not make the world strange, but rather help to confirm
the already given sense of the world. It recursively dreams the world it
makes sense in. While technoscience dreamscapes often shore up the
hegemonic experience of the world, they still hold the potential for
opening up alternative ways of being and knowing, feeling and attaching.
If we accept that technoscience dreams, how to affirmatively awaken to
these potentials not only in our futures, but in our pasts as well?

[^31]: On the Girl Effect, see Michelle Murphy, “The Girl: Mergers of
    Feminism and Finance in Neoliberal Times,” *Scholar and Feminist
    Online*, under review; Jason Hickel, “The ‘girl Effect’: Liberalism,
    Empowerment and the Contradictions of Development” 35, no. 8
    (September 14, 2014): 1355–73; Kathryn Moeller, “Proving ‘The Girl
    Effect’: Corporate Knowledge Production and Educational
    Intervention” 33, no. 6 (2013): 612–21; Heather Switzer,
    “(Post)Feminist Development Fables: The Girl Effect and the
    Production of Sexual Subjects,” *Feminist Theory* 14, no. 3
    (December 1, 2013): 345–60.

[^32]: L. Summers, “The Most Influential Investment,” *Scientific
    American* 267, no. 2 (1992): 132; L. Summers, “Investing in All the
    People,” *Policy Research Working Papers, World Bank*, 1992.

[^33]: For more on this history, see Murphy, *Economization of Life*.

[^34]: For ethnographies of girl effect projects on the ground, see
    Moeller, “Proving ‘The Girl Effect’”; Lyndsay MC Hayhurst,
    “Corporatising Sport, Gender and Development: Postcolonial IR
    Feminisms, Transnational Private Governance and Global Corporate
    Social Engagement,” *Third World Quarterly* 32, no. 3 (April 2011):
    531–49, doi:10.1080/01436597.2011.573944.

[^35]: Kalpana Wilson, “‘Race’, Gender and Neoliberalism: Changing
    Visual Representations in Development,” *Third World Quarterly* 32,
    no. 2 (March 2011): 315–31, doi:10.1080/01436597.2011.560471.

[^36]: S. Lawson, “Women Hold up Half the Sky” 164 (2007).p.1

[^37]: Ibid. p. 16

[^38]: Banu Subramaniam, *Ghost Stories for Darwin: The Science of
    Variation and the Politics of Diversity* (University of Illinois
    Press, 2014).

[^39]: Taking this argument to its further extension, it is politically
    possibly and even necessary to conjure other relations not only
    better, but bigger than capitalism. I make this argument through the
    concept of *distributed reproduction* in the coda of *The 
    Economization of Life* (Duke University Press, forthcoming).

