---
title: "Speculative Women and Girls"
author: Michelle Murphy
layout: essay
slug: dreams
next: future-postcolonial-social-sciences
---
 
<p>There are many futures. That is, futurity, the epistemological and affective orientation towards the future, has multiple historical forms. In <em>Futures Past</em>, Reinhart Koselleck examines the relationships between past, present, and future in European thought.<a href="#fn1" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref1"><sup>1</sup></a> He argues that until the 18<sup>th</sup> century, European Christian temporality was shaped by a sense of continuity and sameness: today is like tomorrow, because time has moved according to external forces only interrupted at the end times, when the world will end. In the 18<sup>th</sup> century, a sense of historical time congealed, in which the past differs from and shapes the arriving future. Thus, in historical time, the past accumulates to explain the peculiarity of the present, while the future becomes a horizon of expectation progressing forward. In historical time, the present becomes a shifting ratio of marching modernity between what was and what will be next. While we might quibble with Koselleck’s Euro-centric typology of time, the important methodological point is that we can historicize futurity as a relational effect and trace the work of technoscience in generating particular ways of doing futurity. As historians, we can investigate varieties of “futurities” co-existing and intermingling, but still distinguishable from one another, in the twentieth century. We can distinguish modern historical time futurity from speculative futurity.</p>
<p>The twentieth century history of social science development projects exemplifies this intermingling of multiple kinds of futurity. Articulated in the aspirational climate of decolonization and postcolonial nationalisms, this mid-century history was often oriented through temporalities of modernization, in which places, practices and people were temporized as being more or less forward or backward in time, as having arrived, or not yet arrived, at a teleological modernity located on a singular axis. Moreover, from the 1950s through 1980s, this version of spatialized temporality could be accompanied by development schemes that plotted a universal set of evolutionary stages for humanity into the modern. Development became then, the successful movement into the industrial stage, where a nation arrived at the modern horizon where the new future begins.</p>
<p>In contrast to this modernist, staged futurity, postcolonial, late-twentieth century development social science—practiced in its inconsistent variety by statisticians, epidemiologists, economists, sociologists, anthropologists, demographers and others—mixed in aspirational, probabilistic, and anticipatory calculative orientations, among them macroeconomic modelling, five year plans, and demographic transitions models. Such epistemological practices introduced a speculative temporal orientation within development, where the future was uncertain and conjectural, not teleological or universal, and the present had to be altered for the sake of that possible future. Pilot projects, field site experiments, and social surveys all oriented towards postcolonial national futures at the speculative crosshairs of macroeconomic productivity and population growth. India, Pakistan, and later Bangladesh, for example, all existed in the forecast of a population bomb that demanded to be peremptorily defused, such that the present could be declared a state of emergency for the sake of a possible apocalyptic future. By the turn of the millennium, speculative economic logics would become dominant in development projects, temporizing life in terms of risk pools, investment potentials, and rates of return. Thus, we can distinguish the futurity of modernity posited by modernization theory and historical time, from the futurity of speculation. In speculation, the future is uncertain and conjectural, and yet is made palpable in the present, and hence the present is framed and acted on for the sake of reacting to conjectural possibilities.<a href="#fn2" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref2"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
<p>Speculation itself (which names both the temporality of a genre of fiction and a kind of finance) is not homogenous and can be further typologized according to the divergent practices that make it possible: derivatives trading differs from insurance probabilities, which differ again from climate modelling or cancer prognosis. The recent manifesto <a href="http://speculatethis.pressbooks.com/"><em>Speculate This!</em></a> calls for practices of “affirmative speculation” that attempt to experiment with and reopen the future against the hegemonic “firmative speculations” that conjure narrow potentialities to then exploit and foreclose them.<a href="#fn3" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref3"><sup>3</sup></a> For the manifesto’s authors, afrofuturism, speculative fiction, and contemporary techno-art are generative arenas of affirmative speculation. In this version of the politics of speculation, authors (singular and collective) contest hegemonic speculative calculative practices with the claim that “the future” is at stake. Good artistic speculation opens imaginaries, while bad technoscientific and economic speculation fixates on narrowed possibilities gamed to benefit only the few. While this might be an enticing framework for making sense of the politics of speculation, the historian may find that speculative practices do not obey such moral neatness.</p>
<p>In this set of short essays, I trace the figure of South Asian women and girls as a site of technoscience speculation. Importantly, I do not mean actual women and girls, but rather the <em>figure</em> of South Asian women and girls as a figment of transnational social science, development, and speculative practices. In doing so, I will suggest that these politically charged speculative practices are as much affective and imaginative projects as they are calculative achievements. This, the first essay, looks at the 1905 “Sultana’s Dream,” an early twentieth century example of feminist science fiction written in South Asia. Later essays will focus on the demographic transition and girls as human capital.</p>

<p><strong>Sultana’s Dream</strong></p>

<p>Begum Rokeya Shekhawat Hossain was a celebrated advocate for Muslim women’s education and equality in colonial India, born in 1880 in what is now called Bangladesh.<a href="#fn4" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref4"><sup>4</sup></a> She was among the most prominent Bengali Muslim feminists of the early twentieth century. At sixteen Begum Rokeya married the much older Deputy Magistrate of Bhagalpur. As an elite Bengali Muslim woman, she did not go to school and instead resided in the seclusion of strict purdah (a religious and social practice of secluding women and girls from non-kin men). Her husband died young and with the money left to her she opened the first school for Muslim girls in Calcutta, which still exists today. A prominent social reformer, she also founded the Calcutta chapter of the Anjuman-i-Khawatin-i-Islam, the primary women’s organization for Muslim women in India. In 1905, she published a short story in <em>The Indian Ladies Magazine</em> that is now considered one of the first expressions of feminist science fiction. Writing in Bengali as well as English, she penned numerous essays toward instigating the “awakening” of Muslim women. She harshly condemned women’s restricted lives in purdah, as well as claims of their spiritual and biological inferiority. In the portrait gallery of Dhaka’s Pink Palace museum, Begum Rokeya is the single female face dignifying the walls.</p>
<p>Written in English, “Sultana's Dream” is narrated by an elite woman in her luxurious secluded chambers who falls asleep as she is “thinking lazily of the condition of Indian womanhood.”<a href="#fn5" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref5"><sup>5</sup></a> She then wakes into a dream. Alert within her imaginary, she finds herself walking unveiled in daylight in another world where the gendered structures of South Asian Muslim society are reversed: men are now confined to mardana (the name of the outer part of a household for men and guests, in complement to zenana, the inner part of a household reserved for women). Women are now unveiled in public, acting as the rulers and scientists of this other world. “Lady” scientists have turned away from building military machines and instead invent ways to harness rain from the sky and share energy from the sun. One school of women scientists “invented a wonderful balloon, to which they attached a number of pipes. By means of this captive balloon which they managed to keep afloat above the cloud-land, they could draw as much water from the atmosphere as they pleased.” Another university “invented an instrument by which they could collect as much sun-heat as they wanted. And they kept the heat stored up to be distributed among others as required.”<a href="#fn6" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref6"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
<p>The most distinguished science of this other world was botany. The roads were formed of a “soft carpet” of moss and flowers, and the city itself was a marvelous garden.<a href="#fn7" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref7"><sup>7</sup></a> Sewing, too, was a celebrated art, and beauty highly valued. In the garden, “[e]very creeper, every tomato plant was itself an ornament,” such that the products of science were as much aesthetic as functional, and science itself was not divorced from feelings.<a href="#fn8" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref8"><sup>8</sup></a> In this world, all women were educated, and married late, while men minded the children. Kinship was expanded such that “a distant cousin is as sacred as a brother.”<a href="#fn9" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref9"><sup>9</sup></a> In the end, the narrator abruptly falls out of the dream to find herself back in her lounge chair, which was also back in zenana. “Sultana’s Dream” envisions an early twentieth century feminist technoscience through a counterfactual world, a world turned upside down.</p>
<p>Awake to its fantasy, the story invites oppressed women to dream with technoscience and nature at a moment of agitation for access to formal education. While the inversion of men’s and women’s worlds reverses binary gendered norms and compulsory heterosexuality rather than unravelling them, the text suggests that dreaming is a domain where the possibilities of technoscience are created and contested. Yet, the story does not reverse all axes of inequality. “Ladyland” is ruled by a Queen and the narrative leaves aristocracy and class hierarchy in place as a benevolent form of rule. It elevates botany, one of the few sciences gendered feminine and open to amateur women, as the premise for an alternative form of expert rule. In this way, the story can be read as containing a decolonizing politics: offering an uncolonized otherwise in which science is non-violent, sustains life, and is endemic to women and South Asian culture. Through its figures of gardens, clouds and pleasure, “Sultana’s Dream” suggests the possibility that subjects who dream with technoscience might do life, gender, kinship, and nation differently.</p>
<p>One important way of reading this story is to celebrate the authorship of a Bengali Muslim woman writer, feminist, and social reformer in the early twentieth century. Taking another approach here, I want to work with the text as an invitation to think about the relationship between technoscience, futurity, and dreaming. (I draw inspiration from Projit Mukharji’s argument for the importance of dreamscapes as potent intangibles within South Asian practices of innovation).<a href="#fn10" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref10"><sup>10</sup></a> Crucially, “Sultana’s Dream” hails women and girls as aspirational and generative subjects of technoscience, as crucial to the constitution of an anticipatory postcolonial nation. It asks readers to “awaken” to an alternate possibility, even though the narrator herself concludes by waking back into the complexity of her luxurious oppression. The story offers dreaming as a generative intangible that can affectively and politically reorient the world and, in its narrative construction, is awake to the force of that dreaming. It is a speculative imaginary that works to unfix its 1905 present and orient the reader to possibilities of other futures, even if improbable, for both women and science.</p>
<p>In this way, we might read the narrative premise of “Sultana’s Dream” as prompting a rethinking of the work of fantasy, speculation, and technoscience. What would it mean to be awake to the dream, to become alert to the varieties of imaginative force of speculation in technoscience? Instead of placing imaginaries on the side of the popular, open, and the fictive, and placing technoscience on the side of elites, foreclosing, and calculation, might we take seriously the suggestion that technoscience is potent for its ability to create not only facts, but also affectively charged temporized imaginaries. Can one say that a characteristic of technoscience is that it induces dreamscapes, in this instance, nonsubjective imaginaries conjured by the practices of colonial science, by the numbers of development indexes, by the tickertape of stock markets, by the graphs of demography? The trust that animates numbers is not self-evident. It must be explained. What does it look like to let go of the author function in our histories of speculation and speculative fiction? Begum Rokeya did not just author “Sultana’s Dream” about technoscience, it was a symptom of the rise of speculation about girls and women that technoscience helped to animate.<a href="#fn11" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref11"><sup>11</sup></a> The story dreams <em>with</em> <em>and through</em> (not just about) technoscience.</p>
<p>In other words, speculative fiction arose in a world that shimmered with economic and social forces brought into relief through practices of quantification that did more than just aggregate, measure and model with numbers. The macroeconomy is miraculated for us as an imaginary through measures like GDP that operate as <em>phantasmagrams</em>, speculative quantitative practices that are enriched with affect, that propagate imaginaries, lure feeling, and hence have supernatural effects in surplus of their rational precepts. The term phantasmagram attempts to be awake in the dream; it draws attention to the felt and astral consequences of social science’s speculative quantitative practices in the form of algorithms, equations, measures, forecasts, models, simulations and cascading correlations.<a href="#fn12" class="footnoteRef" id="fnref12"><sup>12</sup></a> I use the term to name the affective stimulus of an index like GDP beyond its calculative efficiencies. All the data points, measures and empowerment indexes, all the glossy development campaign reports and coded state spreadsheets, together conjure women and girls as charged speculative figures of the future tethered to larger imaginaries of national and global potential.</p>
<p>Thus, we might see the futurity in “Sultana’s Dream” as doing more than subverting the figure of woman within the colonial temporal goalposts of modernity and tradition. “Sultana’s Dream,” perhaps, participates in the beginning of a technoscientific project that figured women and girls as contested postcolonial speculative subjects. It signals the emergence of affectively charged speculative temporization through which feminism, postcolonialism, development, capitalism, and nationalism would all come to operate in the dreamscape of the twentieth century.</p>

<section class="footnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>Reinhart Koselleck, <em>Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time</em>, trans. Keith Tribe (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004).<a href="#fnref1">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p>V. Adams, A. Clarke, and M. Murphy, “Anticipation: Technoscience, Life, Affect, Temporality,” <em>Subjectivities</em> 28/1 (2009): 246-65.<a href="#fnref2">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>Uncertain Commons, <em>Speculate This!</em> (Durham: Duke University Press, 2013).<a href="#fnref3">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p>On Begum Rokeya Hossain’s feminism and “Sultana’s Dream,” See, Hasanat, Fayeza, “Sultana’s Utopian Awakening: An Ecocritical Reading of Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain’s Sultana’s Dream,” <em>Asiatic</em> 7/2 (2013): 114-25; Yasmin Hossain, “The Begum’s Dream: Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain and the Broadening of Muslim Women’s Aspirations in Bengal,” <em>South Asia Research</em> 12/1 (1992): 1-19; Md. Mahmudul Hasan, “Commemorating Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain and Contextualising Her Work in South Asian Muslim Feminism,” <em>Asiatic</em> 7/2 (2013): 39-59; Mohammad Moniruzzaman Miah, “A Feminist Critical Evaluation of How Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain’s Language of Protest Deplored Patriarchy and Social Anachronism in the British Bengal,” <em>Journal of Arts and Humanities</em> 3/10 (2014): 41-51; Bharati Ray, <em>Women of India: Colonial and Post-Colonial Periods</em> (New Dehli: SAGE Publications India, 2005); Bharati Ray, <em>Early Feminists of Colonial India: Sarala Devi Chaudurani and Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain</em> (New Dehli: Oxford Universitiy Press India, 2002).<a href="#fnref4">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p><span id="__Fieldmark__2867_267880537" class="anchor"></span>Roquiah Sakhawal Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” in <em>God Gives, Man Robs &amp; Other Writings</em> (Dhaka: Narigrantha Prabartana, 2002), 31.<a href="#fnref5">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p>Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 38, 39.<a href="#fnref6">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 37.<a href="#fnref7">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 37.<a href="#fnref8">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p>Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 46.<a href="#fnref9">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>Projit Mukharji, “Swapnaushadhi: The Embedded Logic of Dreams and Medical Innovation in Bengal,” <em>Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry</em> 38/3 (2014): 387-407.<a href="#fnref10">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?,” in <em>Language, Counter-Memory, Practice</em>, ed. Donald F. Bouchard, trans. Donald F. Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Ithaca: Cornel University Press, 1977), 113–38.<a href="#fnref11">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>In thinking through the phantasmagram in the cold war period, I am drawing inspiration from the work of Joseph Masco which demonstrates that one of the crucial accomplishments of cold war US nuclear and military techniques and infrastructures were powerful new imaginaries and affective orientations. Joseph Masco, “‘SURVIVAL IS YOUR BUSINESS’: Engineering Ruins and Affect in Nuclear America,” <em>Cultural Anthropology</em> 23/2 (2008): 361-98; Joseph Masco, <em>The Theater of Operations: National Security Affect from the Cold War to the War on Terror</em> (Durham: Duke University Press Books, 2014). Jackie Orr’s work shows the “psychopolitics” as the affectively distributed panic of cold war cybernetics and militarism: Jackie Orr, <em>Panic Diaries: A Genealogy of Panic Disorder</em> (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006).<a href="#fnref12">↩</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>
