---
title: "Phantasmagrams of Population"
author: Michelle Murphy
layout: essay
previous: sultanas-dream
slug: phantasmagrams-of-population
next: clock-is-ticking
---

<figure>
![](/images/Murphy-3-1.jpg)

<figcaption>Image from [IBM](https://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/1130/images/4513PH05.jpg) 
</figcaption>
</figure>


Imagine a desk-sized [IBM 1130](http://ibm1130.org/) computer in 1971.
There is no screen attached to the computer’s bulky body. Instead, above
the keyboard is a printer that spits out results intermittently. In
1971, this machine pulsated with the future. The computer is programmed
using FORTRAN with the [Carolina Population Center Family](http://www.cpc.unc.edu/aboutcpc/history) Planning Administrator
Training Game that promises to train players in the arts of altering the
future of a national population.[^19]

The intended players are visiting civil servants involved in family
planning programs in their home country. In this role playing game, a
group of players are assigned roles as “decision makers” within a
hypothetical country and charged with overseeing a national family
planning effort. Players are prompted to allocate a finite amount of
funds towards different family planning project options. The players’
decisions are entered on programming cards that are fed into the
computer, and run through a simulation of the relationships between
population growth, “averting births,” death rate, literacy, family
planning demand, contraceptive supply, and income per capita, and other
variables. The computer then prints out the results as a tally of
“births averted” and “cost per averted birth,” and another round of play
begins.

The creators of the Family Planning Administrator Training Game were
upfront that their simulation inadequately captured the multitude of
uncertain and obscure relations that made up “population” and its
effects on “the economy.” Their game, however, was intended to imbue
players (assumed male in their literature) with a palpable sense of the
“interrelationships that link with uncertainty” making up
“population.”[^20] The game gave players a *feel* for population. “It is
not meant to be a facsimile of any society or governmental structure,”
the game designers explained, “It is to family planning what the game of
chess is to chivalry. One plays the game to gain experience in making
decisions in the face of uncertainty.”[^21] The game thus aspired to
conjure “population” as an aggregate form moving into the future replete
with correlations and uncertainties into player’s imaginaries.

For the game designers, developing countries were profoundly plagued by
“the irrational use of human reproductive powers.”[^22] Their game
contributed to the “urgent need for more systematic approaches” towards
the governing of population that was becoming a dominant goal within US
foreign policy. While family planning administrators were not expected
to understand the equations behind the simulation of population, it was
hoped that such training would imbue them with the sense of population
as a changeable constellation of relationships that could be
systematically steered towards desirable or dangerous futures,
especially by following US policy recommendations. The Family Planning
Administrators Training Game offered a pedagogy weighted with emotion,
but also an embodied sense of a massive phenomenon beyond calculative
apprehension.

This simulation game joined other computer simulations, demographic
models, five year plans, simple graphs, and other forms of
quantitatively summoning the future, all of which contributed to
miraculating “population” as a dense cloud of correlations that could be
felt and worried over. Population became a forceful intangible of cold
war/postcolonial governance. Population, I suggest, was a kind of
*phantasmagram*, an intangible form brought into sensibility as a
palpable presence with the help of quantitative practices.[^23] Models,
simulations, and forecasts are examples of speculative quantitative
practices that in the second half of the twentieth century propagated
popular imaginaries, lured feeling, and hence had supernatural effects
in surplus of their calculation.[^24]

The term phantasmagram points to the affectively charged and
extra-objective relations that are part of the speculative force of
numbers. In other words, it asks us to notice the ways calculative
speculations dream our world. Quantitative models do not merely
explicate population, they conjure a greater dissipated canopy of forces
whose conspicuous existence exceeds capacities to calculate. In the
second half of the twentieth century, “population” became a forceful
phantasmagram, a fulsome beyond of immaterial forces propelling
subjects, as well as subject not yet and perhaps never born, into
uncertain futures, some hopeful others apocalyptic.

The speculative future of population was invested with aspirations and
anxieties tied both to the promissory economic abundance of planned
intervention and to the threatening nightmares of planetary collapse.
While many social scientists factored in demand, approval, happiness,
and other psychological states of individuals in their explications of
population dynamics, the notion of the phantasmagrapm points to an
extra-subjective affective dimension to quantification practices.
Quantification helps to dream ineffable realms that can take shape as a
collectively felt form in excess of the representational and logical
limits of quantification practices themselves. One does not need to
understand the mathematical models behind population to join in the
feeling of being surrounded by a possible future of overpopulation.

Population in the twentieth century came to inhabit just such a
collective dreaming, helping people to feel dystopic or promissory
futures for themselves, their family, their nation, or the planet.
Beyond simulation and models, the mass dreaming of population as an
aggregate of relations stretching into the future was aided by national
and transnational infrastructures of data making – from censuses to
demographic and health surveys – as well as a visual vocabulary of
crowds, slums, and poverty. Population became a speculative aggregate
form that surrounded everyone, made of a throng of correlations
connected together as anticipatory trends in surfeit of what any
individual dreams or does alone. As an artifact of a technical
infrastructures and quantitative practices, population contributes to a
non-individual and non-conscious dreaming that substantiates the world
and is built back into government, institutions, and policy, into birth
control technologies, family planning programs, and clinics. Uncertain
and yet felt, it structures the world.



<figure>
![](/images/Murphy-3-2.png)

<figcaption>Image from the [Population Research Bureau](http://www.prb.org/Publications/Lesson-Plans/TheDemographicTransitionAContemporaryLookataClassicModel/Activity1.aspx) 
</figcaption>
</figure>

Undergirding “population” within the Family Planning Administrators
Training Game was one of the most influential phantasmagrams of the
second half of the twentieth century – the demographic transition. The
demographic transition was typically represented with a simple graph
that plotted birth rate, death rate, and population growth over time. It
plotted a set of shifts in birth and death rates that, according to an
influential signature study, had accompanied the historical progress of
Europe as it transformed from a “primitive” economy, to a
“pre-industrial” economy, and finally to a “modern industrial”
economy.[^25] This transition was elevated as an abstract model that
tied together economic futures and population futures.

Accordingly, in primitive economies, birth and death rates were both
high, leading to a steady population. In the pre-industrial economy, new
technologies and interventions lowered death rates, yet birth rates
remained the same, and hence the overall population grew rapidly. With
the arrival at a modern industrial economy, the birth rate would also
fall, leading back to a stable population. In the mid-twentieth century,
many demographers and social scientists in synchrony with US foreign
policy believed that post-colonial regions of the world were stuck in a
state of high population growth that would thwart their arrival at a
proper economic modernity.[^26]

In this influential yard stick of modernization, economic practices,
people, and regions were temporized as more or less forward or back in
time, and it was typically only at the modern horizon where new futures
began.[^27] Non-Western nations were largely categorized as existing in
a state of not yet having arrived at modernity. They were declared in a
temporal state of not-yet, of waiting to achieve the horizon where the
future starts.[^28] Economic development then became a “formative
speculative” project aimed at moving regions into universalized
industrial modernity. This temporal imaginary was given grammar and
number by the work of cold war/postcolonial social scientists, who
crafted the many measures and indexes that were correlated with the
passage into modernity: increased GDP per capita, birth rates, and
women’s social status were among the most enduring and potent of such
measures that were used to auger the chances of transitioning into
modernity.

Moreover, such measures often took women and girls as their objects of
speculative concern. In South Asia, older colonial logics had long
deployed the status of women as a sign of cultural barbarity, and thus
as a condition that legitimated colonial intervention.[^29] In the age
of postcolonial development, women’s status continued to signal the
temporal lag or promise of a racialized nation. Yet, in the first three
decades of globalized family planning, women and girls were largely—and
merely--abstractions of social science models.

From the 1960s through 1980s, US supported cold war/postcolonial social
science in particular plotted a global schema of uncertain modernization
in which the fecundity of racialized abstract female bodies threatened
to derail the future.[^30] As GDP became a universalized measure of the
performance of a nation’s “economy” at mid-century, and because
population size had a direct mathematical effect on the comparative
measure GDP per capita, the sense of the future hinging on averting
birth, and thus on the future life-making capacities of women’s bodies,
intensified.

How to arrive at the future of low birth rate, high GDP and industrial
modernity? While some social scientists believed birth rates would only
fall after economic development had been achieved, others, including the
influential social scientists at USAID’s Office of Population, believed
that preventing births was a necessary precursor to economic
development. Fertility, and thus the “irrational reproductive powers” of
women’s bodies endangered the future of economic progress. Thus, the
model of the demographic transition staged a new kind of postcolonial
futurity and speculative problem. How to intervene in the many clouds of
relations that directed the future of national “population” for the sake
of the future macroeconomy? How to prevent future life? How to avert
future birth?

National family planning programs around the planet were caught up in
this new speculative temporal orientation. The future was uncertain and
conjectural, and yet the present had to be altered for the sake of
possible futures. Women’s bodies themselves were conduits to these
different futures. Their possible fertility had to be preempted. In
South Asia and elsewhere (tracing a geography of US cold war
intervention), pilot projects, experimental field sites, and social
surveys proliferated from the 1960s through 1980s, all oriented towards
uncertain and aspirational crosshairs of averting future life. India,
Pakistan, and later Bangladesh, for example, all resided in the forecast
of a population bomb that demanded to be peremptorily defused, such that
the present could be declared in a state of emergency for the sake of a
possible apocalyptic future.

Through the phantasmagram of population, technoscience dreamed futures
through poor women’s figurative bodies, resulting in the concreteness of
sometimes coercive and violent family planning campaigns. Despite the
fact that academic demographers have vigorously debated the veracity of
the demographic transition model, it continues to travel as a potent
phantasmagram today, directing policies and undergirding the collective
imaginary of population. Poor, brown women’s bodies have been, and
continue to be, dense with speculation.

[^19]: R. Scott Moreland et al., “The Carolina Population Center Family
    Planning Administrator Training Game,” *Management Science* 18, no.
    12 (1972): B – 635.

[^20]: Ibid. p. B-636.

[^21]: Ibid. p. B-636

[^22]: Ibid. p. B-635.

[^23]: Michelle Murphy, *Economization of Life* (Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press, forthcoming).

[^24]: In thinking through the phantasmagram in the cold war period, I
    am drawing inspiration from the work of Joseph Masco which
    demonstrates that one of the crucial accomplishments of cold war US
    nuclear and military techniques and infrastructures were powerful
    new imaginaries and affective orientations. Joseph Masco, “‘SURVIVAL
    IS YOUR BUSINESS’: Engineering Ruins and Affect in Nuclear America,”
    *Cultural Anthropology* 23/2 (2008): 361-98; Joseph Masco, *The
    Theater of Operations: National Security Affect from the Cold War to
    the War on Terror* (Durham: Duke University Press Books, 2014).
    Jackie Orr’s work shows the “psychopolitics” as the affectively
    distributed panic of cold war cybernetics and militarism: Jackie
    Orr, *Panic Diaries: A Genealogy of Panic Disorder* (Durham: Duke
    University Press, 2006).

[^25]: S. Sretzer, “The Idea of Demographic Transition and the Study of
    Fertility: A Critical Intellectual History,” *Population and
    Develoment Review* 19, no. 4 (1993): 659–701.

[^26]: Crucial to the dominance of the demographic transition was the
    transnational work of Frank Notestein, the founding director of
    Princeton’s influential Office of Population Research as well as the
    director of Population Council from 1959 -1968.

[^27]: On temporizing regions of the world as forward and backward, see
    A. McClintock, *Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the
    Colonial Contest* (New York: Routledge, 1995); Johannes Fabian,
    *Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object* (Columbia
    University Press, 2002). On the history of modernization theory, see
    D. Engerman et al., *Staging Growth: Modernization, Development, and
    the Global Cold War* (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press,
    2003); M. Latham, *Modernization as Ideology: American Social
    Science and National Building in the Kennedy Era* (Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 2000); Michael E. Latham, *The
    Right Kind of Revolution: Modernization, Development, and U.S.
    Foreign Policy from the Cold War to the Present* (Cornell University
    Press, 2011).

[^28]: The sway of this temporization of the world was so forceful that
    it is still at work, and scholars continue to refute it. For example
    of this continued refutation, see the 2015 special issue of the East
    Asian Science Technology Studies Journal, “[We have Never Been Latecomers](https://www.dukeupress.edu/we-have-never-been-latecomers-making-knowledge-spaces-for-east-asian-technosocial-practices-i-circulation)”


[^29]: On this history, see Lata Mani, *Contentious Traditions: The
    Debate on Sati in Colonial India* (Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 1998); M. Sinha, *Specters of Mother India: The
    Global Restructuring of an Empire* (Durham: Duke University Press,
    2006).

[^30]: On the history of globalized family planning, see M. Connelly,
    *Fatal Misconception: The Struggle to Control World Population*
    (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008); K.A. Ali, *Planning the
    Family in Egypt: New Bodies, New Selves* (Austin: University of
    Texas Press, 2002); D. Critchlow, “Implementing Family Planning
    Policy in Postwar America,” in *With Us Always: Private Charity and
    Public Welfare in Historical Perspective*, ed. D.T. Critchlow and
    C.H. Parker (Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield, 1998), 211–41; M.
    Kaler, *Running After Pills: Gender, Politics and Contraception in
    Colonial Rhodesia* (Portsmouth: Heinemann, 2003); S.L. Pigg,
    “Globalizing the Facts of Life,” in *Sex in Development: Science,
    Sexuality and Morality in Global Perspective*, ed. S.L. Pigg and V.
    Adams (Durham: Duke University Press, 2005), 39–65; S. Halfon, *The
    Cairo Consensus: Demographic Surveys, Women’s Empowerment and Regime
    Change in Population Policy* (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2006); F.
    Akhter, *Depopulating Bangladesh: Essays on the Politics of
    Fertility* (Dhaka: Narigrantha Prabartana, 1992); S. Ahluwalia,
    *Reproductive Restraints: Birth Control in India, 1877-1947*
    (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2008); N. Chatterjee and
    N. Riley, “Planning an Indian Modernity: The Gendered Politics of
    Fertility Control,” *Signs* 26, no. 3 (2001): 811–45; R. Petchesky,
    *Global Prescriptions: Gender Health and Human Rights* (London: Zed
    Press, 2003).


