---
title: "Sultana's Dream"
author: Michelle Murphy
layout: essay
slug: sultanas-dream
next: phantasmagrams-of-population
previous: future-postcolonial-social-sciences
---


“Sultana’s Dream,” written in 1905, is celebrated as one of the earliest
examples of feminist science fiction. Its author, Begum Rokeya Shekhawat
Hossain, was a renowned advocate for Muslim women’s education and
equality in colonial India, born in 1880 in what is now Bangladesh.[^7]
Begum Rokeya was among the most prominent Bengali Muslim feminists of
the early twentieth century. At sixteen, she married the much older
Deputy Magistrate of Bhagalpur. As an elite Bengali Muslim woman, she
did not go to school and lived strict purdah (a religious and social
practice of secluding women and girls from non-kin men). With the
support of her brother who was undertaking a British style education,
Begum Rokeya cultivated her own education at home. Her husband died
young and with the money left to her she opened the first school for
Muslim girls in Calcutta, which still exists today. A prominent social
reformer, she also founded the Calcutta chapter of the
Anjuman-i-Khawatin-i-Islam, the primary women’s organization for Muslim
women in India. Writing in Bengali as well as English, she penned
numerous essays toward instigating the “awakening” of Muslim women. She
harshly condemned women’s restricted lives in purdah, as well as claims
of their spiritual and biological inferiority. In the portrait gallery
of Dhaka’s Pink Palace museum, Begum Rokeya is the single female face
dignifying the walls.

Begum Rokeya published “Sultana’s Dream” as a short English-language
story in *The Indian Ladies Magazine,* a publication for “modern” Indian
women. The story is narrated by an elite woman protagonist from her
luxurious secluded chambers. The protagonist falls asleep as she is
“thinking lazily of the condition of Indian womanhood.”[^8] She then
wakes into a dream.

Alert within her imaginary, she finds herself walking unveiled in
daylight in another world where the gendered structures of Indian Muslim
society are reversed: men are now confined to mardana (the name of the
outer part of a household for men and guests, in complement to zenana,
the inner part of a household reserved for women). In this world turned
upside down, women are unveiled in public, acting as the rulers and
scientists of this alternative way of being. “Lady” scientists have
turned away from building military machines and instead invent ways to
harness rain from the sky and share energy from the sun. One school of
women scientists “invented a wonderful balloon, to which they attached a
number of pipes. By means of this captive balloon which they managed to
keep afloat above the cloud-land, they could draw as much water from the
atmosphere as they pleased.” Another university “invented an instrument
by which they could collect as much sun-heat as they wanted. And they
kept the heat stored up to be distributed among others as required.”[^9]

Relishing her new public freedom, the protagonist learns the history
behind this fantastical otherworld. Not long ago, these scientific feats
were dismissed by the male-dominated military society as “sentimental
nightmares.” The revolution in gender roles, and the celebration of the
women’s science, had been achieved by a violent military victory. The
male-run military had failed to repel an invasion by another country
resulting in the tremendous loss of life. In a final bid to resist the
invasion, the exhausted men agreed to retire to seclusion at their homes
and turn the war over to the women. Female scientists then unleashed
their sun-heat on the enemy, burning them down, and winning dominion
over their country. Through this act of mass violence, a new society,
and scientific culture, was born.

The most distinguished science of this dream world was botany. The roads
were formed of a “soft carpet” of moss and flowers, and the city itself
was a marvelous garden.[^10] Sewing, too, was a celebrated art, and
beauty highly valued. In the garden, “\[e\]very creeper, every tomato
plant was itself an ornament,” such that the products of science were as
much aesthetic as functional, and science itself was not divorced from
feelings.[^11] “Sentimental” science, saturated with feeling and
kinship, was esteemed. This rearrangement of sentiment extended to
society itself. Here, all women were educated, and married late, while
men minded the children. Kinship was expanded such that “a distant
cousin is as sacred as a brother.”[^12] Thriving in a city built out of
the botanical and ecological feats of science, science itself expressed
new kinds of affective relations. In the end, the narrator abruptly
falls out of the dream to find herself back in her lounge chair, which
was also back in her own zenana.

Penned in a “real world” zenana, “Sultana’s Dream” summons an early
twentieth century feminist technoscience through a counterfactual world,
a world turned inside out. Awake to its projections, the story invites
oppressed women to dream *with* technoscience, social-relations, and
nature at a moment of agitation for access to formal education and South
Asian feminism. Yet, the story does not reverse all axes of inequality.
“Ladyland” is ruled by a Queen and the narrative leaves aristocracy and
class hierarchy in place as a benevolent form of rule. While the
inversion of men’s and women’s worlds reverses, rather than unravels,
binary gendered norms and compulsory heterosexuality, the text
influentially summons into apprehension the radical potential of another
way of doing technoscience, and the very possibility of contesting the
naturalization of the present. Begum Rokeya would herself become one of
the most revered women in the history of Bangladesh, and “Sultana’s
Dream” would become a celebrated inspiration for a different world right
into the present.

Written in a place and century when agricultural practices were being
rearranged by colonial regimes and capitalism, “Sultana’s Dream”
elevated botany, one of the few sciences gendered feminine and open to
amateur women, as the pivot for an alternative form of expert rule. In
this way, the story can be read as containing a decolonizing politics:
offering an uncolonized otherwise in which science becomes non-violent,
sustains life, and is endemic to women and South Asian culture. In
conjuring a phantasma of ecological, plant-centric science, Sultana’s
Dream presages the emergence of strong environmental and ecological
feminisms in South Asia, from the Chipko movement to the
internationally known ecofeminism of Vandana Shiva, or the ecological
farming movement of [Nayakrishi Andolon and the seed sharing work of
UBINI](http://www.ubinig.org/index.php/campaigndetails/showAerticle/6/13)G.
Through its figures of gardens, clouds and pleasure, “Sultana’s Dream”
suggests the possibility that subjects who dream with technoscience
might do life, gender, kinship, and nation differently.

<figure>
![](/images/Murphy-2-1.jpg)

<figcaption>Image from [_The Daily Star_](http://www.thedailystar.net/begum-rokeya-day-observed-in-rangpur-1997) 
</figcaption>
</figure>


One important way of reading this story is to celebrate the authorship
of an eminent Bengali Muslim woman writer, feminist, and social reformer
in the early twentieth century. Adding to this recognition, the text
might also be read as an invitation to think about the relationship
between technoscience, futurity, gender, and dreaming. Sultana’s Dream
can be situated along a genre of Western utopian writing that used the
trope of the dream as the entrance into conjuring another world.[^13]
More than this, in colonial Bengal, dreaming was charged with other
histories and forces. Dreams hold a special role in Islamic history and
in The Qu’ran.[^14] The Prophet Muhammed’s revelations included dreams
that were divinely inspired. Dream interpretation was an established
feature of medieval Muslim literature and practice, and a thick history
of dream interpretation exists in Bengal.[^15] Dreams can have a
prophetic potential, and offer divinely inspired insights and valued
knowledge. Such dream-visions can happen both when asleep and awake, as
waking visions. Importantly, they are understood to come to the dreamer
as opposed to being produced or authored by her. In the book *Dreams
that Matter,* about “dreaming in the undreamy time” of recent Egypt,
anthropologist Amira Mittermaier traces the history of Islamic dream
interpretation, warning against the all too frequent temptation of
Western scholarship to want to interpret the “unconscious” meaning of
dreams, and assign dreams to subjects. Mittermaier instead situates
Islamic dream interpretation in a long history of Islamic philosophical
and theological contemplation that ponders the difficulty of
distinguishing between wakefulness and dream, or between our thinking
and reality.[^16] The historian Projit Mukharji, writing about colonial
Bengal, draws out the importance of dreamscapes as potent intangibles
within South Asian traditional medical practices.[^17] Dreams, he has
argued, were a well of divine inspiration for innovative new treatments.
Dreams had epistemic authority that conferred divine force onto new
remedies or practices. Thus, dreams are not mere flights of fancy or
creations of the unconscious. They are a source of world-making that are
interacted with and bring potential, insight and innovation into the
world. Dreaming can be the perception of an intangible presence or
potential in a world saturated with intangibilities and held together by
imaginaries. The recognition of the powerful world making capacities of
nonsecular dreaming in Islamic and Bengali dream practice, pushes back
on Benjamin’s analysis of phantasmagoria to underline that technoscience
is as just one of many modalities of wakeful dreaming. Technoscientific
speculation, joins an already rich array of potent practices that
apprehend the immaterial and felt as a historical force.

Read through this history of potent dreaming, “Sultana’s Dream” hails
women and girls as aspirational and generative subjects of technoscience
and as crucial to the constitution of an anticipatory postcolonial
nation. Women become the agents and not just the objects of speculation.
Begum Rokeya described her social reform work as part of an “awakening”
of women. Sultana’s Dream “awakens” readers to an alternate possibility,
even though the narrator herself concludes by waking back into the
complexity of her luxurious oppression. Feminist technoscience is
affirmatively performed in the dream, and more than this, Sultana’s
Dream summons other futures through the speculative potential of
technoscience. Today, the story is still active as an inspiration
towards fashioning a future otherwise, a stimulus to [art
exhibits](http://www.sawcc.org/sultanas-dream/) and inspiring
[contemporary feminist ecological practices](http://pwrdf.org/2006/recognizing-the-role-played-by-midwives-in-bangladesh-communities-1320683255/).
The text offers dreaming as a generative force that can affectively and
politically reorient the potentials in the world. In its narrative
construction, the story is very much awake to the force of that
dreaming. It is a speculative imaginary that works to unfix its 1905
present and summon other futures, even if improbable, for both women and
science.

What would it mean to be awake to the dream, to become alert to the
varieties of imaginative force and feeling that make up technoscience? I
want to take seriously the suggestion that technoscience is potent for
its ability to create not only facts, but also affectively charged
temporized imaginaries. Can one say that a characteristic of
technoscience is that it induces dreamscapes, in this instance,
nonsubjective imaginaries conjured by the practices of colonial science,
by the numbers of development indexes, by the tickertape of stock
markets, by the graphs of demography? What does it look like to let go
of the author function in our histories of speculation and speculative
fiction, and instead attend, like Benjamin, to the collective phantasma
that accompany the built and inhabited world?[^18] In this way, Begum
Rokeya did not just author “Sultana’s Dream” about technoscience, it was
at least partly animated by the rise of speculation about girls and
women that technoscience (then colonial, now postcolonial) helped to
create. The story dreams *with* *and through* (not just about)
technoscience.

Thus, we might see the speculative futurity in “Sultana’s Dream” as
doing more than subverting the figure of woman within the colonial
goalposts of modernity and tradition. “Sultana’s Dream,” perhaps,
participates affirmatively in a technoscientific project that figured
women and girls as contested postcolonial speculative subjects. It
signals the emergence of affectively charged speculative temporization
through which feminism, postcolonialism, development, capitalism, and
nationalism would all come to operate in the dreamscape of the twentieth
century.

[^7]: On Begum Rokeya Hossain’s feminism and “Sultana’s Dream,” See,
    Hasanat, Fayeza, “Sultana’s Utopian Awakening: An Ecocritical
    Reading of Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain’s Sultana’s Dream,” *Asiatic* 7/2
    (2013): 114-25; Yasmin Hossain, “The Begum’s Dream: Rokeya Sakhawat
    Hossain and the Broadening of Muslim Women’s Aspirations in Bengal,”
    *South Asia Research* 12/1 (1992): 1-19; Md. Mahmudul Hasan,
    “Commemorating Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain and Contextualising Her Work
    in South Asian Muslim Feminism,” *Asiatic* 7/2 (2013): 39-59;
    Mohammad Moniruzzaman Miah, “A Feminist Critical Evaluation of How
    Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain’s Language of Protest Deplored Patriarchy
    and Social Anachronism in the British Bengal,” *Journal of Arts and
    Humanities* 3/10 (2014): 41-51; Bharati Ray, *Women of India:
    Colonial and Post-Colonial Periods* (New Dehli: SAGE Publications
    India, 2005); Bharati Ray, *Early Feminists of Colonial India:
    Sarala Devi Chaudurani and Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain* (New Dehli:
    Oxford Universitiy Press India, 2002).

[^8]: <span id="__Fieldmark__2867_267880537"
    class="anchor"></span>Roquiah Sakhawal Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,”
    in *God Gives, Man Robs & Other Writings* (Dhaka: Narigrantha
    Prabartana, 2002), 31.

[^9]: Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 38, 39.

[^10]: Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 37.

[^11]: Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 37.

[^12]: Hossain, “Sultana’s Dream,” 46.

[^13]: A classic example is Campanno’s City of the Sun. Utopian writing
    is often referred to as an act of dreaming, whether or not the story
    itself uses a dream trope explicitly. The English word dream has had
    this sense of prophecy and hope for the future since the 17th
    century.

[^14]: Nile Green, “The Religious and Cultural Roles of Dreams and
    Visions in Islam,” *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society* 13, no. 3
    (2003): 287–313; Amira Mittermaier, *Dreams That Matter: Egyptian
    Landscapes of the Imagination* (University of California Press,
    2010).

[^15]: Projit Mukharji, “Swapnaushadhi: The Embedded Logic of Dreams and
    Medical Innovation in Bengal,” *Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry*
    38, no. 3 (September 1, 2014): 387–407; Lawrence Cohen, “Ethical
    Publicity: On Transplant Victims, Wounded Communities, and the Moral
    Demands of Dreaming,” *Ethical Life in South Asia*, 2010, 253–74.

[^16]: Mittermaier points out that Al-Ghazali, the eleventy century
    muslim theologian and philosopher, cites a prophetic saying that “we
    are all dreaming and awaken only when we die,” resituating dreaming
    as the state of ordinary life. Mittermaier, *Dreams That
    Matter*.(13)

[^17]: Mukharji, “Swapnaushadhi.”

[^18]: Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?,” in *Language,
    Counter-Memory, Practice*, ed. Donald F. Bouchard, trans. Donald F.
    Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Ithaca: Cornel University Press, 1977),
    113–38.

