---
title: "Evolutionary Futures"
subtitle: "Apeman, Spaceman"
author: Erika Lorraine Milam
layout: essay
slug: apeman
---
Visions of our evolutionary futures depend fundamentally on our
perceptions of the past. More specifically, they are built from a
trajectory that connects the past to the present and extends into the
unknown years that lay before us. Ask a biologist to predict the future
of human evolution and she will likely tell you to stick to science. If
you persisted, you might learn that creating any plausible picture of
the future requires at least two additional factors: a firm grasp of the
biological principles currently affecting our survival and reproduction,
and a sense of when to begin the extrapolation.

Easier said than done. In the late 1960s, for example, the chasm between our evolutionary past
and our technological future yawned wide. If the hypothesized [Dawn of
Man](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ML1OZCHixR0) ostensibly represented
a fundamental transition to a fully human way of life, the dramatic
achievements of the Space Age seemed to poise humanity once again at the
brink of irreversible transformation.

During that decade, paleoanthropologists like Mary and Louis Leakey
grabbed headlines as they uncovered fossil
[hominins](http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/whats-in-a-name-hominid-versus-hominin-216054/)
in the northern plains of recently decolonized Tanzania.[^1] The layers
of bones they meticulously documented gave physical form to our remote
ape-like ancestors. Olduvai Gorge, where they toiled, remains an
important paleoanthropological site today. Over the years, specimens
found there and throughout the rift valley in eastern Africa have shaped
our vision of deep human history as a [great branching
tree](http://humanorigins.si.edu/evidence/human-family-tree) of now
extinct species. Bipedalism, a capacity for language, the ability to
manufacture complex technologies and conceptualize “tomorrow”—these
traits evolved over millions of years. Many scientists in the ’60s,
however, still believed it likely that humans became human in a far more
temporally coiled moment, as each trait spawned others, in a maelstrom
of positive feedback.

Although Americans reacted with dismay at the Soviets’ success in
launching the first artificial satellite (1957) and then again at Yuri
Gagarin’s orbit of Earth (1961), they cheered at the end of the decade
as Apollo 11’s landing capsule settled onto the surface of the moon on
20 July 1969 and listened intently as Neil Armstrong intoned through
gentle static… “[That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for
mankind](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z9WDsgCIroE).” The emotional
investment in the Space Race emerged as a function, too, of the [growing stockpiles](http://blog.nuclearsecrecy.com/2012/05/11/friday-image-visualizing-the-stockpile/) of nuclear weapons and fears that the Cold War might turn hot.[^2]
Humanists and scientists alike reasoned that the world they now
inhabited operated according to a new — and therefore confusing — logic.

Psychologist Charles E. Osgood called attention to this imbalance
between our technological facility and our incapacity for rational
self-control in face of nuclear proliferation in his 1962 treatise, *An
Alternative to War and Surrender.* We must let go of our “Neanderthal
mentality,” he wrote, and adopt more cooperative strategies of behaving.
Only through small gestures of trust could policy makers break the cycle
of escalating mistrust. He called his theory GRIT, for *g*raduated and
*r*eciprocated *i*nitiatives in *t*ension reduction. He reasoned that by
consciously adopting psychological strategies that fostered trust,
individuals and governments alike would be able to escape the raw
emotional contests that reduced complex issues to simplistic dualisms.
It was long past time, Osgood contended, to transition from a psychology
conditioned by our dark evolutionary past into a more hopeful, rational,
future.[^3]

The view that human nature was intrinsically out-of-date extended to
students of animal behavior as well. Take, for example, ethologist and
popular author Konrad Lorenz and his enduringly popular *On
Aggression*.[^4] In it he suggested that humans lacked an evolved
capacity for reckoning with our newfound capacity to kill at a distance
with the aid of missiles and bombs. True predators (with dangerous
physical adaptations like the claws and sharp teeth of carnivores)
rarely killed each other in male-male contests. When two dogs fight,
for example, the loser can signal his defeat, abandon the fight, and run
away—potentially injured but alive. Doves, on the other hand, don’t
possess ritual submission gestures in their behavioral repertoire, so an
aggressive dove might peck an unwanted cage-mate to death. For Lorenz,
humans were more like doves than dogs, and that made us incredibly
dangerous. Worse, with new technologies like atomic bombs, antagonists
never faced each other and so would not be able to signal cues of
submission even if humans had them. Yet again, our technological future
worked at odds with our evolutionary past.

In each of these cases, the biological essence of what it meant to be
human was immutably fixed in the evolutionary past, brought to a
grinding halt by the development of culture. This paradox of the nuclear
age—nature as past, nurture as future—has proved quite resilient.

More recently, public fascination with immutable human nature has lead
some nutritionists to suggest that we should eat “paleo,” eliminating
from our diet all foods derived from our supposedly post-evolutionary
past: processed foods as well as cultivated and domesticated grains and
vegetables. Yet, as zoologist Marlene Zuk convincingly argues in
*Paleofantasy*, early humans were not perfectly adapted to their own
environmental conditions: they were adapted enough not to go extinct,
which is all that was required.[^5] Their physiologies, just like ours,
were a series of tradeoffs; their diets, like ours, varied widely with
geography and climate. Nor has human biological evolution stopped.
Humans continue to evolve both biologically and culturally. And the
future of humanity is always in the process of becoming (to paraphrase
Osgood’s hopeful sentiment from the opening of *An Alternative to War
and Surrender*).

{% include figure.html src='/images/Milam-Paleofantasy.jpg' caption="When *The Chronicle Review* published an excerpt of Marlene Zuk’s *Paleofantasy* (February 22, 2013), they chose as their cover image a still of buxom Raquel Welch starring in the campy [*One Million Years B.C.*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSYmJur0Npw), released in 1966. Clad in her fur bikini, she provides a sunny contrast to the contemplative, hirsute, and naked \"Apeman\" on the cover of Leon Stover and Harry Harrison’s edited collection of anthropological science fiction—*Apeman, Spaceman* (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1968)." %}

When George Orwell penned his anti-totalitarian dystopia*—Nineteen
Eighty-Four: A Novel*—he placed the following motto in the hands of the
only political Party, “Who controls the past […] controls the future:
who controls the present controls the past.”[^6] Orwell’s bleakness not
withstanding, he was right. In science, of course, there are many
parties claiming the present and, as a result, many futures. For a
historian, the multiplicity of futures is a boon. Reading past
iterations of projected futures allows us to uncover (following Orwell)
the underlying assumptions about the present that scientists mobilized
in constructing their theories. Additionally, we can track whose version
of the future proved persuasive and how scientific consensus changes.
The future is a great historical resource.

How much, then, did the tendency to see human nature as significantly
out of time with our current technological capacity reflect the social
and scientific convictions of the Cold War? And, if it was located
firmly in that historical moment, how do we make sense of the paleo
diet? Many biologists agreed that when humans became human — however you
might define that — a new form of evolutionary process came into being.
Our very human capacity for culture, language, and learning, signaled a
rupture with our physical, zoological past. This new kind of evolution
has gone by a variety of names. Paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson in
1949 contrasted the older “organic evolution” with “cultural evolution”
and surmised that whereas the former proceeded by “interbreeding,” the
latter instead progressed as a result of “inter-thinking.”[^7]
Population geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky similarly suggested seven
years later that understanding the legacy of humanity required
accounting for culture. “The evolution of man,” he wrote, “represents
one of the rare instances of the emergence, in the history of life, of a
radically new kind of biological organization, and of the adoption of an
entirely new way of life.”[^8] Both agreed, as a result, that the only
destiny or purpose guiding humanity’s future was our own free will.

Writing after the Second World War, Simpson and Dobzhansky struggled to
make sense of the trauma that had torn Europe apart in the previous
decades. They took their professional standing as scientists seriously
and felt a commensurate ethical responsibility to correct popular
misunderstandings about the theory of evolution. In doing so, they hoped
to build a more equitable world for all human cultures and ethnicities.
Articulating a truly universal human nature, anchored in our shared
evolutionary past, and distinguishing humanity from “mere animals,” thus
became an intellectual project weighted with political and moral
valences. We can read in their publications a flat denial of eugenic
racial typologies as pseudoscientific and socially harmful, as well as
an abiding hope that as a result of “inter-thinking” and the production
of new knowledge, the future of humanity was bright with promise.

In editing an anthology of anthropological science fiction,
anthropologist Leon Stover also highlighted this dual identity, which he
read as the twinned concerns that preoccupied physical and cultural
anthropologists: *Apeman, Spaceman* (published in 1968)*.*[^9] Language
and symbolic thought made culture possible, Stover argued, and culture
in turn transformed human biology. Ever since, culture and the complex
technologies we produce with it have acted as extensions of the human
organism, accumulating faster and changing more dramatically than
genetics. These rapid alterations in our relationship with our built
environment necessitated new means of communication and pedagogy—hence
Stover’s fascination with science fiction as the perfect medium to reach
a new generation of tech-savvy undergraduates.

When Osgood quipped, “Perhaps Modern Man, with his head stuck in the
sky, still has Neanderthal feet that are stuck in the mire,” his
contrast of a chromed present and a fur-trimmed past fit well with the
regnant evolutionary theory of the day.[^10] But he feared the fate
awaiting humanity was likely to be a post-apocalyptic scramble back to
civilization rather than an international collaborative jaunt through
the stars. The iconography of a primitive past maintained its Cold War
grip on public and scientific imaginations because it also made manifest
a monstrous potential future.

[^1]: Louis Leakey had a particularly friendly relationship with
    National Geographic. See, for example, Louis S. B. Leakey and Robert
    F. Sisson, “Exploring 1,750,000 Years Into Man’s Past,” 120/4
    (October 1961), 564-589; Melvin M. Payne, “The Leakeys of Africa:
    Family in Search of Prehistoric Man,” 127/2 (February 1965),
    194-231.

[^2]: Ironically, one of the scientific tools that emerged from research
    into radioactivity included the dating of hominin fossils with a
    Potassium-Argon “atomic clock”—see Garniss H. Curtis, “A Clock for
    the Ages: Potassium-Argon,” *National Geographic* 120/4 (October
    1961), 590-592, published in the same issue as Leakey’s announcement
    of 1,750,000 year-old *Zinjanthropus* (now, *Paranthropus boisei*).

[^3]: Charles Osgood, [*An Alternative to War and Surrender*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/alternative-to-war-or-surrender/oclc/185922) (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
    1962). For a fuller exploration of GRIT, see Paul Erickson, Judy L.
    Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca Lemov, Thomas Sturm, and Michael D.
    Gordin, [*How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind*](http://books.google.com/books?id=-b0BAgAAQBAJ)*: The
    Strange Career of Cold War Rationality* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).

[^4]: Konrad Lorenz, [*On Aggression*](http://books.google.com/books?id=rxSjKHkZvQ0C), translated by
    Marjorie Kerr (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1966). On Lorenz’s
    variable use of animal metaphors in his writings, see Tania Munz,
    “[‘My Goose Child Martina’: The Multiple Uses of Geese in the Writings of Konrad Lorenz](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.1525/hsns.2011.41.4.405),” *Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences* 41/4 (2011): 405-446.

[^5]: Marlene Zuk, [*Paleofantasy: What Evolution Really Tells Us About Sex, Diet, and How We Live*](http://books.google.com/books?id=OzyYc5n13scC) (NY: Norton, 2013).

[^6]: George Orwell, [*1984*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/1984-a-novel/oclc/62259482) (New York: Plume, 1983 [1949]), 32.

[^7]: George Gaylord Simpson, [*Meaning of Evolution: A Study of the History of Life and of Its Significance for Man*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/meaning-of-evolution-a-study-of-the-history-of-life-and-of-its-significance-for-man/oclc/1005731) (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1949), 337.

[^8]: Theodosius Dobzhansky, [*The Biological Basis of Human Freedom*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/biological-basis-of-human-freedom/oclc/171164) (New York: Columbia University Press, 1956), 107.

[^9]: Leon Stover and Harry Harrison, ed. [*Apeman, Spaceman*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/apeman-spaceman/oclc/15288853) (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1968).

[^10]: Osgood, *An Alternative to War and Surrender*, 19.

